He who has trod the shadows of Xeethra 
And looked upon the coal-red sun oblique, 
Henceforth returns to no anterior land, 

But haunts a latter coast 
Where cities crumble in the black sea-sand 

And dead gods drink the brine. 

He who has known the gardens of Xeethra 
Where bleed the fruits tom by the simorgh’s beak, 
Savors no fruit of greener hemispheres: 

In arbors uttermost, 
In sunset cycles of the sombering years, 
He sips an aramanth wine. 

He who has loved the wild girls of  
Shall come not back a gentler love to seek, 

Nor know the vampire’s from the lover’s kiss: 

For him the scarlet ghost 
Of Lilith from time’s last necropolis 
Rears amorous and malign. 
He who has sailed in galleys of  
And seen the looming of strange spire and peak, 
Must face again the sorcerer-sent typhoon. 
And take the steerer’s post 
On far-poured oceans by the shifted moon 
Or the re-shapen Sign. 
-The Dark Chateau

Subtle and manifold are the nets of the Demon , who 
followeth his chosen from birth to death and from death 
to birth , throughout many lives . 
—The Testaments of Carnamagos. 

Long had the wasting summer pastured its suns, like 
fiery red stallions, on the dun hills that crouched before 
the Mykrasian Mountains in wild easternmost Cincor. 
The peak-fed torrents were become tenuous threads or 
far-sundered, fallen pools; the granite boulders were 
shaled by the heat; the bare earth was cracked and crev 
iced; and the low, meager grasses were seared even to the 
roots. 
-Xeethra 

So it occurred that the boy Xeethra, tending the black 
and piebald goats of his uncle Pomos, was obliged to fol 
low his charges farther each day on die combes and hill 
tops. In an afternoon of late summer he came to a deep, 
craggy valley which he had never before visited. Here a 
cool and shadowy tarn was watered by hidden well- 
springs; and the ledgy slopes about the tarn were mantled 
with herbage and bushes that had not wholly lost their 
vernal greenness. 

Surprised and enchanted, the young goatherd followed 
his capering flock into this sheltered paradise. There was 
small likelihood that the goats of Pomos would stray 
afield from such goodly pasturage; so Xeethra did not 
trouble himself to watch them any longer. Entranced by 
his surroundings, he began to explore the valley, after 
quenching his thirst at the clear waters that sparkled like 
golden wine. 
-The Wizard Pomos

To him, the place seemed a veritable garden pleasance. 
Forgetting the distance he had already come, and the 
wrath of Pomos if the flock should return late for the 
milking, he wandered deeper among the winding crags 
that protected the valley. 
—The Testaments of Carnamagos. 

On every hand the rocks grew 
sterner and wilder; the valley straitened; and he stood 
presently at its end, where a rugged wall forbade further 
progress. 

Feeling a vague disappointment, he was about to turn 
and retrace his wanderings. Then, in the base of the sheer 
wall, he perceived the mysterious yawning of a cavern. It 
seemed that the rock must have opened only a little while 
before his coming: for the lines of cleavage were clearly 
marked, and the cracks made in the surrounding surface 
were unclaimed by the moss that grew plentifully else 
where. From the cavern’s creviced lip there sprang a 
stunted tree, with its newly broken roots hanging in air; 
and the stubborn taproot was in the rock at Xeethra’s 
feet, where, it was plain, the tree had formerly stood. 

Wondering and curious, the boy peered into the invit 
ing gloom of the cavern, from which, unaccountably, a 
soft balmy air began to blow. There were strange odors 
on the air, suggesting the pungency of temple incense, the 
languor and luxury of opiate blossoms. They disturbed 
the senses of Xeethra; and, at the same time, they seduced him
with their promise of unbeholden marvelous 
things. Hesitating, he tried to remember certain legends 
that Pomos had told him: legends that concerned such 
hidden caverns as the one on which he had stumbled. But 
it seemed that the tales had faded now from his mind, 
leaving only a dim sense of things that were perilous, for 
bidden, and magical. He thought that the cavern was the 
portal of some undiscovered world—and the portal had 
opened expressly to permit his entrance. Being of a nature
both venturesome and visionary, he was undeterred 
by the fears that others might have felt in his place. Over 
powered by a great curiosity, he soon entered the cave, 
carrying for a torch a dry, resinous bough that had fallen 
from the tree in the cliff. 

Beyond the mouth he was swallowed by a rough- 
arched passage that pitched downward like the gorge of 
some monstrous dragon. The torch’s flame blew back, 
flaring and smoking in the warm aromatic wind that 
strengthened from unknown depths. The cave steepened 
perilously; but Xeethra continued his exploration, climb 
ing down by the stairlike coigns and projections of the 
stone. 

Like a dreamer in a dream, he was wholly absorbed by 
the mystery on which he had happened; and at no time 
did he recall his abandoned duty. He lost all reckoning of 
the time consumed in his descent. Then, suddenly, his 
torch was extinguished by a hot gush that blew upon him 
like the expelled breath of some prankish demon. 
-The Tome of Obelisks

Feeling the assailment of a black panic, he tottered in 
darkness and sought to secure his footing on the danger 
ous incline. But, ere he could relume the blown-out 
torch, he saw that the night around him was not com 
plete, but was tempered by a wan, golden glimmering 
from the depths below. Forgetting his alarm in a new 
wonder, he descended toward the mysterious light. 
-The Book of Secrets

At the bottom of the long incline, Xeethra passed 
through a low cavern-mouth and emerged into sun-bright 
radiance. Dazzled and bewildered, he thought for a moment 
that his subterranean wanderings had brought him 
back to the outer air in some unsuspected land lying 
among the Mykrasian hills. Yet surely the region before 
him was no part of summer-stricken Cincor: for he saw 
neither hills nor mountains nor the black sapphire heaven 
from which the aging but despotic sun glared down with 
implacable drouth on the kingdoms of Xeethra.

He stood on the threshold of a fertile plain that lapsed 
illimitably into golden distance under the measureless 
arch of a golden vault. Far off, through the misty radiance, 
there was a dim towering of unidentifiable masses 
that might have been spires and domes and ramparts. A 
level meadow lay at his feet, covered with close-grown 
curling sward that had the greenness of verdigris; and the 
sward, at intervals, was studded with strange blossoms 
appearing to turn and move like living eyes. Near at 
hand, beyond the meadow, was an orchard-like grove of 
tall, amply spreading trees amid whose lush leafage he 
descried the burning of numberless dark-red fruits. The 
plain, to all seeming, was empty of human life; and no 
birds flew in the fiery air or perched on the laden boughs. 
There was no sound other than the sighing of leaves: a 
sound like the hissing of many small hidden serpents. 


To the boy from the parched hill-country, this realm 
was an Eden of untasted delights. But, for a little, he was 
stayed by the strangeness of it all, and by the sense of 
weird and preternatural vitality which informed the whole 
landscape. Flakes of fire appeared to descend and melt in 
the rippling air; the grasses coiled with verminous writhings;
 the flowery eyes returned his regard intently; the 
trees palpitated as if a sanguine ichor flowed within 
them in lieu of sap; and the undemote of adder-like hiss 
ings amid the foliage grew louder and sharper. 

Xeethra, however, was deterred only by the thought 
that a region so fair and fertile must belong to some jealous
owner who would resent his intrusion. He scanned 
the unpeopled plain with much circumspection. Then, 
deeming himself secure from observation, he yielded to 
the craving that had been roused within him by the red, 
luxuriant fruit. 

The turf was elastic beneath him, like a living sub 
stance, as he ran forward to the nearest trees. Bowed with 
their shining globes, the branches drooped around him. 
He plucked several of the largest fruits and stored them 
thriftily in the bosom of his threadbare tunic. Then, un 
able to resist his appetence any longer, he began to devour one of the fruits. The rind broke easily under his 
teeth, and it seemed that a royal wine, sweet and puis 
sant, was poured into his mouth from an overbrimming 
cup. He felt in his throat and bosom a swift warmth that 
almost suffocated him; and a strange fever sang in his 
ears and wildered his senses. It passed quickly, and he 
was startled from his bemusement by the sound of voices 
falling as if from an airy height. 

He knew instantly that the voices were not those of 
men. They filled his ears with a rolling as of baleful 
drums, heavy with ominous echoes; yet it seemed that 
they spoke in articulate words, albeit of a strange language.
Looking up between the thick boughs, he beheld a 
sight that inspired him with terror. Two beings of colossean
stature, tall as the watch-towers of the mountain 
people, stood waist-high above the near tree-tops. It was 
as if they had appeared by sorcery from the green ground 
or the gold heavens: for surely the clumps of vegetation, 
dwarfed into bushes by their bulk, could never have con 
cealed them from Xeethra’s discernment. 

The figures were clad in black armor, lusterless and 
gloomy, such as demons might wear in the service of 
Thasaidon, lord of the bottomless underworlds. Xeethra 
felt sure that they had seen him; and perhaps their unin 
telligible converse concerned his presence. He trembled, 
thinking now that he had trespassed on the gardens of 
genii. Peering fearfully from his covert, he could discern 
no features beneath the frontlets of the dark helms that 
were bowed toward him: but eye-like spots of yellowish- 
red fire, restless as marsh-lights, shifted to and fro in void 
shadow where the faces should have been. 

It seemed to Xeethra that the rich foliage could afford 
no shelter from the scrutiny of these beings, the guardians 
of the land on which he had so rashly intruded. He was 
overwhelmed by a consciousness of guilt: the sibilant 
leaves, the drum-like voices of the giants, the eye-shaped 
flowers—all appeared to accuse him of trespass and 
thievery. At the same time he was perplexed by a queer 
and unwonted vagueness in regard to his own identity: 
somehow it was not Xeethra the goatherd . . . but an 
other . . . who had found the bright garden-realm and 
had eaten the blood-dark fruit. This alien self was with 
out name or formidable memory; but there was a flicker 
ing of confused lights, a murmur of indistinguishable 
voices, amid the stirred shadows of his mind. Again he 
felt the weird warmth, the swift-mounting fever, that had 
followed the devouring of the fruit. 

From all this, he was aroused by a livid flash of light 
that clove downward toward him across the branches. 
Whether a bolt of levin had issued from the clear vault, 
or whether one of the armored beings had brandished a 
great sword, he was never quite sure afterward. The light 
seared his vision, he recoiled in uncontrollable fright, and 
found himself running, half blind, across the open turf. 
Through whirling bolts of color he saw before him, in a 
sheer, topless cliff, the cavern-mouth through which he 
had come. Behind him he heard a long rumbling as of 
summer thunder . . . or the laughter of colossi. 

Without pausing to retrieve the still-burning brand he 
had left at the entrance, Xeethra plunged incontinently 
into the dark cave. Through Stygian murk he managed to 
grope his way upward on the perilous incline. Reeling, 
stumbling, bruising himself at every turn, he came at last 
to the outer exit, in the hidden valley behind the hills of 
Cincor. 

To his consternation, twilight had fallen during his ab 
sence in the world beyond the cave. Stars crowded above 
the grim crags that walled the valley; and the skies of 
burnt-out purple were gored by the sharp horn of an 
ivory moon. Still fearing the pursuit of the giant guard 
ians, and apprehending also the wrath of his uncle Por- 
nos, Xeethra hastened back to the little tarn, collected his 
flock, and drove it homeward through the long, gloomy 
miles. 

During that journey, it seemed that a fever burned and 
died within him at intervals, bringing strange fancies. He 
forgot his fear of Pomos, forgot, indeed, that he was 
Xeethra, the humble and disregarded goatherd. He was 
returning to another abode than the squalid hut of Pornos,
built of clay and brushwood. In a high-domed city, 
gates of burnished metal would open for him, and fiery- 
colored banners would stream on the perfumed air; and 
silver trumpets and the voices of blond odalisques and 
black chamberlains would greet him as king in a thou 
sand-columned hall. The ancient pomp of royalty, famil 
iar as air and light, would surround him, and he, the King 
Amero, who had newly come to the throne, would rule as 
his fathers had ruled over all the kingdom of Calyz by the 
orient sea. Into his capital, on shaggy camels, the fierce 
southern tribesmen would bring a levy of date-wine and 
desert sapphires; and galleys from isles beyond the mom- 

ing would burden his wharves with their semi-annual trib 
ute of spices and strange-dyed fabrics. . . . 

Surging and fading like pictures of delirium but lucid 
as daily memories, the madness came and went; and once 
again he was the nephew of Pomos, returning belated 
with the flock. 

Like a downward-thrusting blade, the red moon had 
fixed itself in the somber hills when Xeethra reached the 
rough wooden pen in which Pomos kept his goats. Even 
as Xeethra had expected, the old man was waiting at the 
gate, bearing in one hand a clay lantern and in the other 
a staff of briarwood. He began to curse the boy with 
half-senile vehemence, waving the staff, and threatening 
to beat him for his tardiness. 

Xeethra did not flinch before the staff. Again, in his 
fancy, he was Amero, the young king of Calyz. Bewildered 
and astonished, he saw before him by the light of 
the shaken lantern a foul and rancid-smelling ancient 
whom he could not remember. Hardly could he under 
stand the speech of Pomos; the man’s anger puzzled but 
did not frighten him; and his nostrils, as if accustomed 
only to delicate perfumes, were offended by the goatish 
stench. As if for the first time, he heard the bleating of 
the tired flock, and gazed in wild surprise at the wattled 
pen and the hut beyond. 

“Is it for this,” cried Pomos, “that I have reared my 
sister’s orphan at great expense? Accursed moon-calf! 
thankless whelp! If you have lost a milch-goat or a single 
kid, I shall flay you from thigh to shoulder.” 

Deeming that the silence of the youth was due to mere 
obstinacy, Pomos began to beat him with the staff. At the 
first blow, the bright cloud lifted from Xeethra’s mind. 
Dodging the briarwood with agility, he tried to tell Pornos
of the new pasture he had found among the hills. At 
this the old man suspended his blows and Xeethra went 
on to tell of the strange cave that had conducted him to 
an unguessed garden-land. To support his story, he 
reached within his tunic for the blood-red apples he had 
stolen; but, to his confoundment, the fruits were gone, 
and he knew not whether he had lost them in the dark or 
whether, perhaps, they had vanished by virtue of some 
indwelling necromancy. 

Pomos, interrupting the youth with frequent scoldings, 
heard him at first with open unbelief. But he grew silent 
as the youth went on; and when the story was done, he 
cried out in a trembling voice: 

“Ill was this day, for you have wandered among en 
chantments. Verily, there is no tarn such as you have described 
amid the hills; nor, at this season, has any herder 
found such pasturage. These thin gs were illusion, designed 
to lead you astray; and the cave, I wot, was no 
honest cave but an entrance into hell. I have heard my 
fathers tell that the gardens of Thasaidon, king of the 
seven underworlds, lie near to the earth’s surface in this 
region; and caves have opened ere this, like a portal, and 
the sons of men, trespassing unaware on the gardens, 
have been tempted by the fruit and eaten it. But madness 
comes thereof and much sorrow and long damnation: for 
the Demon, they say, forgetting not one stolen apple, will 
exact his price in the end. Wo! Wo! the goat-milk will be 
soured for a whole moon by the grass of such wizard pas 
ture; and, after all the food and care you have cost me, I 
must find another stripling to ward the flocks.” 

Once more, as he listened, the burning cloud returned 
upon Xeethra. 

“Old man, I know you not,” he said perplexedly. 
Then, using soft words of a courtly speech but half intelligible 
to Pomos: “It would seem that I have gone astray. 
Prithee, where lies the kingdom of Calyz? I am king 
thereof, being newly crowned in the high city of Shathair, 
over which my fathers have ruled for a thousand years.” 

“Ai! Ai!” wailed Pomos. “The boy is daft. These no 
tions have come through the eating of the Demon’s apple. 
Cease your maundering, and help me to milk the goats. 
You are none other than the child of my sister Askli, who 
was delivered these nineteen years agone after her hus 
band, Outhoth, had died of a dysentery. Askli lived not 
long, and I, Pomos, have reared you as a son, and the 
goats have mothered you.” 

“I must find my kingdom,” persisted Xeethra. “I am 
lost in darkness, amid uncouth things, and how I have 
wandered here I can not remember. Old man, I would 
have you give me food and lodging for the night. In the 
dawn I shall journey toward Shathair, by the orient 
main.” 

Pomos, shaking and muttering, lifted his clay lantern 
to the boy’s face. It seemed that a stranger stood before 
him, in whose wide and wondering eyes the flame of 
golden lamps was somehow reflected. There was no wild 
ness in Xeethra’s demeanor, but merely a sort of gentle 
pride and remoteness; and he wore his threadbare tunic 
with a strange grace. Surely, however, he was demented; 
for his manner and speech were past understanding. Por- 
nos, mumbling under his breath, but no longer urging the 
boy to assist him, turned to the milking. . . . 

Xeethra woke betimes in the white dawn, and peered 
with amazement at the mud-plastered walls of the hovel 
in which he had dwelt since birth. All was alien and baf 
fling to him; and especially was he troubled by his rough 
garments and by the sun-swart tawniness of his skin: for 
such were hardly proper to the young king Amero, whom 
he believed himself to be. His circumstances were wholly 
inexplicable; and he felt an urgency to depart at once on 
his homeward journey. 

He rose quietly from the litter of dry grasses that had 
served him for a bed. Pomos, lying in a far comer, still 
slept the sleep of age and senescence; and Xeethra was 
careful not to awaken him. He was both puzzled and repelled 
by this unsavory ancient, who had fed him on the 
previous evening with coarse millet-bread and the strong 
milk and cheese of goats, and had given him the hospital 
ity of a fetid hut. He had paid little heed to the mum 
blings and objurgations of Pomos; but it was plain that 
the old man doubted his claims to royal rank, and, more 
over, was possessed of peculiar delusions regarding his 
identity. 

Leaving the hovel, Xeethra followed an eastward-wind 
ing footpath amid the stony hills. He knew not whither 
the path would lead: but reasoned that Calyz, being the 
easternmost realm of the continent , was situated 
somewhere below the rising sun. Before him, in vision, 
the verdant vales of his kingdom hovered like a fair mi 
rage, and the swelling domes of Shathair were as morning 
cumuli piled in the orient. These things, he deemed, were 
memories of yesterday. He could not recall the circum 
stances of his departure and his absence; but surely the 
land over which he ruled was not remote. 

The path turned among lessening ridges, and Xeethra 
came to the small village of Qth, to whose inhabitants he 
was known. The place was alien to him now, seeming no 
more than a cirque of filthy hovels that reeked and fes 
tered under the sun. The people gathered about him, call 
ing him by name, and staring and laughing oafishly when 
he inquired the road to Calyz. No one, it appeared, had 
ever heard of this kingdom or of the city of Shathair. 
Noting a strangeness in Xeethra’s demeanor, and deeming 
that his queries were those of a madman, the people 
began to mock him. Children pelted him with dry clods 
and pebbles; and thus he was driven from Cith, following 
an eastern road that ran from Cincor into the neighboring 
lowlands of the country of Zhel. 

Sustained only by the vision of his lost kingdom, the 
youth wandered for many moons throughout Xeethra. 
People derided him when he spoke of his kingship and 
made inquiry concerning Calyz; but many, thinking mad 
ness a sacred thing, offered him shelter and sustenance. 
Amid the far-stretching fruitful vineyards of Zhel, and 
into Istanam of the myriad cities; over the high passes of 

Ymorth, where snow tarried at the autumn’s beginning; 
and across the salt-pale desert of Dhir, Xeethra followed 
that bright imperial dream which had now become his 
only memory. Always eastward he went, traveling some 
times with caravans whose members hoped that a mad 
man’s company would bring them good fortune; but 
oftener he went as a solitary wayfarer. 

At whiles, for a brief space, his dream deserted him, 
and he was only the simple goatherd, lost in foreign 
realms, and homesick for the barren hills of Cincor. 
Then, once more, he remembered his kingship, and the 
opulent gardens of Shathair and the proud palaces, and 
the names and faces of them that had served him follow 
ing the death of his father, King Eldamaque, and his own 
succession to the throne. 

At midwinter, in the far city of Sha-Karag, Xeethra 
met certain sellers of amulets from Ustaim, who smiled 
oddly when he asked if they could direct him to Calyz. 
Winking among themselves when he spoke of his royal 
rank, the merchants told him that Calyz was situated sev 
eral hundred leagues beyond Sha-Karag, below the orient 
sun. 

“Hail, O king,” they said with mock ceremony. “Long 
and merrily may you reign in Shathair.” 

Very joyful was Xeethra, hearing word of his lost king 
dom for the first time, and knowing now that it was more 
than a dream or a figment of madness. Tarrying no 
longer in Sha-Karag, he journeyed on with all possible 
haste. . . . 

When the first moon of spring was a frail crescent at 
eve, he knew that he neared his destination. For Canopus 
burned high in the eastern heavens, mounting gloriously 
amid the smaller stars even as he had once seen it from 
his palace-terrace in Shathair. 

His heart leapt with the gladness of homecoming; but 
much he marveled at the wildness and sterility of the region 
through which he passed. It seemed that there were 
no travelers coming and going from Calyz; and he met 
only a few nomads, who fled at his approach like the 
creatures of the waste. The highway was overgrown with 
grasses and cacti, and was rutted only by the winter rains. 
Beside it, anon, he came to a stone terminus carved in the 
form of a rampant lion, that had marked the western 
boundary of Calyz. The lion’s features had crumbled 
away, and his paws and body were lichened, and it 
seemed that long ages of desolation had gone over him. A 
chill dismay was bom in Xeethra’s heart: for only yester 
year, if his memory served him rightly, he had ridden 
past the lion with his father Eldamaque, hunting hyenas, 
and had remarked then the newness of the carving. 

Now, from the high ridge of the border, he gazed down 
upon Calyz, which had lain like a long verdant scroll beside 
the sea. To his wonderment and consternation, the 
wide fields were sere as if with autumn; the rivers were 
thin threads that wasted themselves in sand; the hills were 
gaunt as the ribs of unceremented mummies; and there 
was no greenery other than the scant herbage which a des 
ert bears in spring. Far off, by the purple main, he 
thought that he beheld the shining of the marble domes of 
Shathair; and, fearing that some blight of hostile sorcery 
had fallen upon his kingdom, he hastened toward the city. 

Everywhere, as he wandered heartsick through the ver 
nal day, he found that the desert had established its em 
pire. Void were the fields, unpeopled the villages. The 
cots had tumbled into midden-like heaps of ruin; and it 
seemed that a thousand seasons of drouth had withered 
the fruitful orchards, leaving only a few black and decay 
ing stumps. 

In the late afternoon he entered Shathair, which had 
been the white mistress of the orient sea. The streets and 
the harbor were alike empty, and silence sat on the bro 
ken house-tops and the ruining walls. The great bronze 
obelisks were greened with antiquity; the massy marmorean 
temples of the gods of Calyz leaned and slanted to 
their fall. 

Tardily, as one who fears to confirm an expected thing, 
Xeethra came to the palace of the monarchs. Not as he 
recalled it, a glory of soaring marble half veiled by flow 
ering almonds and trees of spice and high-pulsing foun 
tains, but in stark dilapidation amid blasted gardens, the 
palace awaited him, while the brief, illusory rose of sunset 
faded upon its domes, leaving them wan as mausoleums. 

How long the place had lain desolate, he could not 
know. Confusion filled him, and he was whelmed by utter 
loss and despair. It seemed that none remained to greet 
him amid the ruins; but, nearing the portals of the west 
wing, he saw, as it were, a fluttering of shadows that ap 
peared to detach themselves from the gloom beneath the 
portico; and certain dubious beings, clothed in rotten tat 
ters, came sidling and crawling before him on the cracked 
pavement. Pieces of their raiment dropped from them as 
they moved; and about them was an unnamed horror of 
filth, of squalor and disease. When they neared him, 
Xeethra saw that most of them were lacking in some 
member or feature, and that all were marked by the 
gnawing of leprosy. 

His gorge rose within him and he could not speak. But 
the lepers hailed him with hoarse cries and hollow croakings, 
as if deeming him another outcast who had come to 
join them in their abode amid the ruins. 

“Who are ye that dwell in my palace of Shathair?” he 
inquired at length. “Behold! I am King Amero, the son of 
Eldamaque, and I have returned from a far land to resume 
the throne of Calyz.” 

At this, a loathsome cackling and tittering arose among 
the lepers. “We alone are the kings of Calyz,” one of 
them told the youth. “The land has been a desert for centuries, 
and the city of Shathair has long lain unpeopled 
save by such as we, who were driven out from other 
places. Young man, you are welcome to share the realm 
with us: for another king, more or less, is a small matter 
here.” 

Thus, with obscene cachinnations, the lepers jeered at 
Xeethra and derided him; and he, standing amid the dark 
fragments of his dream, could find no words to answer 
them. However, one of the oldest lepers, well-nigh limbless 
and faceless, shared not in the mirth of his fellows 
but seemed to ponder and reflect; and he said at last to 
Xeethra, in a voice issuing thickly from the black pit of 
his gaping mouth: 

“I have heard something of the history of Calyz, and the 
names of Amero and Eldamaque are familiar to me. In 
bygone ages certain of the rulers were named thus; but I 
know not which of them was the son and which the father. 
Happily both are now entombed, with the rest of their 
dynasty, in the deep-lying vaults beneath the palace.” 

Now, in the graying twilight, other lepers emerged 
from the shadowy ruin and gathered about Xeethra. 
Hearing that he laid claim to the kingship of the desert 
realm, certain of their number went away and returned 
presently, bearing vessels filled with rank water and 
moldy victuals, which they proffered to Xeethra, bowing 
low with a mummery as of chamberlains serving a monarch. 

Xeethra turned from them in loathing, though he was 
famished and athirst. He fled through the ashen gardens, 
among the dry fountain-mouths and dusty plots. Behind 
him he heard the hideous mirth of the lepers; but the 
sound grew fainter, and it seemed that they did not follow 
him. Rounding the vast palace in his flight, he met no 
more of these creatures. The portals of the south wing 
and the east wing were dark and empty, but he did not 
care to enter them, knowing that desolation and things 
worse than desolation were the sole tenants. 

Wholly distraught and despairing, he came to the east 
ern wing and paused in the gloom. Dully, and with a 
sense of dreamlike estrangement, he became aware that 
he stood on that very terrace above the sea, which he had 
remembered so often during his journey. Bare were the 
ancient flower beds; the trees had rotted away in their 
sunken basins; and the great flags of the pavement were 
runneled and broken. But the veils of twilight were tender 
upon the ruin; and the sea sighed as of yore under a purple 
shrouding; and the mighty star Canopus climbed in 
the east, with the lesser stars still faint around him. 

Bitter was the heart of Xeethra, thinking himself a 
dreamer beguiled by some idle dream. He shrank from 
the high splendor of Canopus, as if from a flame too 
bright to bear; but, ere he could turn away, it seemed that 
a column of shadow, darker than the night and thicker 
than any cloud, rose upward before him from the terrace 
and blotted out the effulgent star. Out of the solid stone 
the shadow grew, towering tall and colossal; and it took 
on the outlines of a mailed warrior; and it seemed that 
the warrior looked down upon Xeethra from a great 
height with eyes that shone and shifted like fireballs in the 
darkness of his face under the lowering helmet. 

Confusedly, as one who recalls an old dream, Xeethra 
remembered a boy who had herded goats under summer- 
stricken hills, and who, one day, had found a cavern that 
opened portal-like on a land of strangeness and marvel. 
Wandering there, the boy had eaten a blood-dark fruit 
and had fled in terror before the black-armored giants 
who warded the garden. Again he was that boy; and still 
he was the King Amero, who had sought for his lost 
realm through many regions; and, finding it in the end, 
had found only the abomination of desolation. 

Now, as the trepidation of the goatherd, guilty of theft 
and trespass, warred in his soul with the pride of the 
king, he heard a voice that rolled through the heavens 
like thunder from a high cloud in the spring night. 

“I am the emissary of Thasaidon, who sends me in due 
season to all who have passed the nether portals and have 
tasted the fruit of His garden. No man, having eaten the 
fruit, shall remain thereafter as he was before; but to 
some the fruit brings oblivion, and to others, memory. 
Know, then, that in another birth, ages agone, you were 
indeed the young king Amero. The memory, being strong 
upon you, has effaced the remembrance of your present 
life, and has driven you forth to seek your ancient king 
dom.” 

“If this be true, then doubly am I bereft,” said 
Xeethra, bowing sorrowfully before the shadow. “For, 
being Amero, I am throneless and realmless; and, being 
Xeethra, I can not forget my former royalty and regain 
the content which I knew as a simple goatherd.” 

“Harken, for there is another way,” said the shadow, 
its voice muted like the murmur of a far ocean. “Thasaidon 
is the master of all sorceries, and a giver of magic 
gifts to those who serve him and acknowledge him as 
their lord. Pledge your allegiance, promise your soul to 
him; and in fee thereof the Demon will surely reward 
you. If it be your wish, he can wake again the buried past 
with his necromancy. Again, as King Amero, you shall 
reign over Calyz; and all things shall be as they were in 
the perished years; and the dead faces and the fields now 
desert shall bloom again.” 

“I accept the bond,” said Xeethra. “I plight my fealty 
to Thasaidon and I promise my soul to him if he, in return, 
will give me back my kingdom.” 

“There is more to be said,” resumed the shadow. “Not 
wholly have you remembered your other life, but merely 
those years that correspond to your present youth. Living 
again as Amero, perhaps you will regret your royalty in 
time; and if such regret should overcome you, leading 
you to forget a monarch’s duty, then the whole necro 
mancy shall end and vanish like vapor.” 

“So be it,” said Xeethra. “This, too, I accept as part of 
the bargain.” 

When the words ended, he beheld no longer the 
shadow towering against Canopus. The star flamed with a 
pristine splendor, as if no cloud had ever dimmed it; and, 
without sense of change or transition, he who watched the 
star was none other than King Amero; and the goatherd 
Xeethra, and the emissary, and the pledge given to Thas- 
aidon, were as things that had never been. The ruin that 
had come upon Shathair was no more than the dream of 
some mad prophet; for in the nostrils of Amero the per 
fume of languorous flowers mingled with salt sea-balsams; 
and in his ears the grave murmur of ocean was pierced by 
the amorous plaint of lyres and a shrill laughter of slave- 
girls from the palace behind him. He heard the myriad 
noises of the nocturnal city, where his people feasted and 
made jubilee; and, turning from the star with a mystic 
pain and an obscure joy in his heart, Amero beheld the 
effulgent portals and windows of his father’s house, and 
the far-mounting light from a thousand flambeaux that 
paled the stars as they passed over Shathair. 

It is written in the old chronicles that King Amero 
reigned for many prosperous years. Peace and abundance 
were upon all the realm of Calyz; the drouth came not 
from the desert, nor violent gales from the main; and 
tribute was sent at the ordained seasons to Amero from 
the subject isles and outlying lands. And Amero was well 
content, dwelling superbly in rich-arrased halls, feasting 
and drinking royally, and hearing the praise of his lute- 
players and his chamberlains and his lemans. 

When his life was a little past the meridian years, there 
came at whiles to Amero something of that satiety which 
lies in wait for the minions of fortune. At such times he 
turned from the cloying pleasures of the court and found 
delight in blossoms and leaves and the verses of olden 


poets. Thus was satiety held at bay; and, since the duties 
of the realm rested lightly upon him, Amero still found 
his kingship a goodly thing. 

Then, in a latter autumn, it seemed that the stars 
looked disastrously upon Calyz. Murrain and bligjit and 
pestilence rode abroad as if on the wings of unseen drag 
ons. The coast of the kingdom was beset and sorely har 
ried by pirate galleys. Upon the west, the caravans coming 
and going through Calyz were assailed by redoubtable 
bands of robbers; and certain fierce desert peoples made 
war on the villages lying near to the southern border. The 
land was filled with turmoil and death, with lamentations 
and many miseries. 

Deep was Amero’s concern, hearing the distressful 
complaints that were brought before him daily. Being but 
little skilled in kingcraft, and wholly untried by the ordeals 
of dominion, he sought counsel of his courtlings but 
was ill advised by them. The troubles of the realm multiplied 
upon him; uncurbed by authority, the wild peoples 
of the waste grew bolder, and the pirates gathered like 
vultures of the sea. Famine and drouth divided his realm 
with the plague; and it seemed to Amero, in his sore perplexity, 
that such matters were beyond all medication; 
and his crown was become a too onerous burden. 

Striving to forget his own impotence and the woeful 
plight of his kingdom, he gave himself to long nights of 
debauch. But the wine refused its oblivion, and love had 
now forfeited its rapture. He sought other divertisements, 
calling before him strange maskers and mummers and 
buffoons, and assembling outlandish singers and the play 
ers of uncouth instruments. Daily he made proclamation 
of a high reward to any that could bemuse him from his 
cares. 

Wild songs and sorcerous ballads of yore were sung to 
him by immortal minstrels; the black girls of the north, 
with amber-dappled limbs, danced before him their weird 
lascivious measures; the blowers of the horns of chimeras 
played a mad and secret tune; and savage drummers 
pounded a troublous music on drums made from the skin 
of cannibals; while men clothed with the scales and pelts 

of half-mythic monsters ramped or crawled grotesquely 
through the halls of the palace. But these were vain to 
beguile the king from his grievous musings. 

One afternoon, as he sat heavily in his hall of audi 
ence, there came to him a player of pipes who was clad in 
tattered homespun. The eyes of the man were bright as 
newly stirred embers, and his face was burned to a cindery 
blackness, as if by the ardor of outland suns. Hailing 
Amero with small servility, he announced himself as a 
goatherd who had come to Shathair from a region of valleys 
and mountains lying sequestered beyond the bourn of 
sunset. 

“O king, I know the melodies of oblivion,” he said, 
“and I would play for you, though I desire not the reward 
you have offered. If haply I succeed in diverting you, I 
shall take my own guerdon in due time.” 

“Play, then,” said Amero, feeling a faint interest rise 
within him at the bold speech of the piper. 

Forthwith, on his pipes of reed, the black goatherd 
began a music that was like the falling and rippling of 
water in quiet vales, and the passing of wind over lonely 
hilltops. Subtly the pipes told of freedom and peace and 
forgetfulness lying beyond the sevenfold purple of outland 
horizons. Dulcetly they sang of a place where the years 
came not with an iron trampling, but were soft of tread as 
a zephyr shod with flower petals. There the world’s turmoil 
and troubling were lost upon measureless leagues of 
silence, and the burdens of empire were blown away like 
thistledown. There the goatherd, tending his flock on soli 
tary fells, was possessed of tranquillity sweeter than the 
power of monarchs. 

As he listened to the piper, a sorcery crept upon the 
mind of Amero. The weariness of kingship, the cares and 
perplexities, were as dream-bubbles lapsing in some Leth 
ean tide. He beheld before him, in sun-bright verdure and 
stillness, the enchanted vales evoked by the music; and he 
himself was the goatherd, following grassy paths, or lying 
oblivious of the vulture hours by the margin of lulled wa 
ters. 

Hardly he knew that the low piping had ceased. But 

the vision darkened, and he who had dreamt of a goat 
herd’s peace was again a troubled king. 

“Play on!” he cried to the black piper. “Name your 
own guerdon—and play.” 

The eyes of the goatherd burned like embers in a dark 
place at evening. “Not till the passing of ages and the fall 
ing of kingdoms shall I require of you my reward,” he 
said enigmatically. “Howbeit, I shall play for you once 
more.” 

So, through the afternoon, King Amero was beguiled 
by that sorcerous piping which told ever of a far land of 
ease and forgetfulness. With each playing it seemed that 
the spell grew stronger upon him; and more and more 
was his royalty a hateful thing; and the very grandeur of 
his palace oppressed and stifled him. No longer could he 
endure the heavily jeweled yoke of duty; and madly he 
envied the carefree lot of the goatherd. 

At twilight he dismissed the ministrants who attended 
him, and held speech alone with the piper. 

“Lead me to this land of yours,” he said, “where I too 
may dwell as a simple herder.” 

Clad in mufti, so that his people might not recognize 
him, the king stole from the palace through an unguarded 
postern, accompanied by the piper. Night, like a formless 
monster with the crescent moon for its lowered horn, was 
crouching beyond the town; but in the streets the shadows 
were thrust back by a flaming of myriad cressets. Amero 
and his guide were unchallenged as they went toward the 
outer darkness. And the king repented not his forsaken 
throne: though he saw in the city a continual passing of 
biers laden with the victims of the plague; and faces gaunt 
with fa min e rose up from the shadows as if to accuse him 
of recreancy. These he heeded not: for his eyes were 
filled with the dream of a green silent valley, in a land 
lost beyond the turbid flowing of time with its wreckage 
and tumult. 

Now, as Amero followed the black piper, there descended upon him a sudden dimness; and he faltered in 
weird doubt and bewilderment. The street lights flickered 
before him, and swiftly they expired in the gloom. The 


loud murmuring of the city fell away in a vast silence; 
and, like the shifting of some disordered dream, it seemed 
that the tall houses crumbled stilly and were gone even as 
shadows, and the stars shone over broken walls. Confu 
sion filled the thoughts and the senses of Amero; and in 
his heart was a black chill of desolation; and he seemed 
to himself as one who had known the lapse of long empty 
years, and the loss of high splendor; and who stood now 
amid the extremity of age and decay. In his nostrils was a 
dry mustiness such as the night draws from olden ruin; 
and it came to him, as a thing foreknown and now remembered 
obscurely, that the desert was lord in his 
proud capital of Shathair. 

“Where have you led me?” cried Amero to the piper. 

For all reply, he heard a laughter that was like the peal 
of derisive thunder. The muffled shape of the goatherd 
towered colossally in the gloom, changing, growing, till its 
outlines were transformed to those of a giant warrior in 
sable armor. Strange memories thronged the mind of 
Amero, and he seemed to recall darkly something of an 
other life. . . . Somehow, somewhere, for a time, he had 
been the goatherd of his dreams, content and forgetful 
. . . somehow, somewhere, he had entered a strange 
bright garden and had eaten a blood-dark fruit. . . . 

Then, in a flaring as of infernal levin, he remembered 
all, and knew the mighty shadow that towered above him 
like a Terminus reared in hell. Beneath his feet was the 
cracked pavement of the seaward terrace; and the stars 
above the emissary were those that precede Canopus; but 
Canopus himself was blotted out by the Demon’s shoul 
der. Somewhere in the dusty darkness, a leper laughed 
and coughed thickly, prowling about the ruined palace in 
which had once dwelt the kings of Calyz. All things were 
even as they had been before the making of that bargain 
through which a perished kingdom had been raised up by 
the powers of hell. 

Anguish choked the heart of Xeethra as if with the 
ashes of bumt-out pyres and the shards of heaped ruin. 
Subtly and manifoldly had the Demon tempted him to his 
loss. Whether these things had been dream or necro- 


mancy or verity he knew not with sureness; nor whether 
they had happened once or had happened often. In the 
end there was only dust and dearth; and he, the doubly 
accurst, must remember and repent for evermore all that 
he had forfeited. 

He cried out to the emissary: “I have lost the bargain 
that I made with Thasaidon. Take now my soul and bear 
it before him where he sits aloft on his throne of ever 
burning brass; for I would fulfill my bond to the utter 
most.” 

“There is no need to take your soul,” said the emis 
sary, with an ominous rumble as of departing storm in 
the desolate night. “Remain here with the lepers, or return 
to Pomos and his goats, as you will: it matters little. 
At all times and in all places your soul shall be part of 
the dark empire of Thasaidon.” 


Necromancy in Naat 


Dead longing , sundered evermore from pain: 

How dim and sweet the shadow-hearted love. 

The happiness that perished lovers prove 
In Naat, far beyond the sable main . 

—Song of the Galley-Slaves 

Yadar, prince of a nomad people in the half-desert 
region known as Zyra, had followed throughout many 
kingdoms a clue that was often more elusive than broken 
gossamer. For thirteen moons he had sought Dalili, his 
betrothed, whom the slave-traders of Sha-Karag, swift 
and cunning as desert falcons, had reft from the tribal en 
campment with nine other maidens while Yadar and his 
men were hunting the black gazelles of Zyra. Fierce was 
the grief of Yadar, and fiercer still his wrath, when he 
came back at eve to the ravaged tents. He had sworn then 
a great oath to find Dalili, whether in a slave-mart or 


brothel or harem, whether dead or living, whether tomor 
row or after the lapse of gray years. 

Disguised as a rug-merchant, with four of his men in 
like attire, and guided only by the gossip of bazars, he 
had gone from capital to capital of the continent Zot- 
hique. One by one his followers had died of strange fe 
vers or the hardships of the route. After much random 
wandering and pursuit of vain rumors, he had come alone 
to Oroth, a western seaport of the land of Xylac. 

There he heard a rumor that might concern Dalili; for 
the people of Oroth were still gossiping about the depar 
ture of a rich galley bearing a lovely outland girl, answer 
ing to her description, who had been bought by the em 
peror of Xylac and sent to the ruler of the far southern 
kingdom of Yoros as a gift concluding a treaty between 
these realms. 

Yadar, now hopeful of finding his beloved, took pas 
sage on a ship that was about to sail for Yoros. The ship 
was a small merchant galley, laden with grain and wine, 
that was wont to coast up and down, hugging closely the 
winding western shores of  and venturing never 
beyond eyesight of land. On a clear blue summer day it 
departed from Oroth with all auguries for a safe and tran 
quil voyage. But on the third mom after leaving port, a 
tremendous wind blew suddenly from the low-lying shore 
they were then skirting; and with it, blotting the heavens 
and sea, there came a blackness as of night thickened 
with clouds; and the vessel was swept far out, going 
blindly with the blind tempest. 

After two days the wind fell from its ravening fury and 
was soon no more than a vague whisper; and the skies 
cleared, leaving a bright azure vault from horizon to hori 
zon. But nowhere was there any land visible, only a waste 
of waters that still roared and tossed turbulently without 
wind, pouring ever westward in a tide too swift and 
strong for the galley to stem. And the galley was borne 
on irresistibly by that strange current, even as by the hur 
ricane. 

Yadar, who was the sole passenger, marveled much at 
this thing; and he was struck by the pale terror on the 


faces of the captain and crew. And, looking again at the 
sea, he remarked a singular darkening of its waters, 
which assumed from moment to moment a hue as of old 
blood commingled with more and more of blackness: 
though above it the sun shone untarnished. So he made 
inquiry of the captain, a graybeard from Yoros, named 
Agor, who had sailed the ocean for forty summers; and 
the captain answered: 

“This I had apprehended when the storm bore us west 
ward: for we have fallen into the grip of that terrible 
oceanstream which mariners call the Black River. Ever 
more the stream surges and swiftens toward the place of 
the sun’s outermost setting, till it pours at last from the 
world’s rim. Between us now and that final verge there is 
no land saving the evil land of Naat, which is called also 
the Isle of Necromancers. I know not which were the 
worse fate, to be wrecked on that infamous isle or hurled 
into space with the waters falling from earth’s edge. From 
either place there is no return for living men such as we. 
And from the Isle of Naat none go forth except the ill 
sorcerers who people it, and the dead who are raised up 
and controlled by their sorcery. In magical ships that 
breast the Black River, the sorcerers sail at will to other 
strands; and beneath their necromancy, to f ulfill their 
wicked errands, the dead men swim without pause for 
many nights and days whithersoever the masters may send 
them.” 

Yadar, who knew little of sorcerers and necromancy, 
was somewhat incredulous concerning these matters. But 
he saw that the blackening waters streamed always more 
wildly and torrentially toward the skyline; and verily 
there was small hope that the galley could regain its 
southward course. And he was troubled chiefly by the 
thought that he should never reach the kingdom of 
Yoros, where he had dreamt to find Dalili. 

All that day the vessel was borne on by the dark seas 
racing weirdly beneath an airless and immaculate heaven. 
It followed the orange sunset into a night filled with large, 
unquivering stars; and at length it was overtaken by the 
flying amber mom. But still there was no abating of the 



26  

waters; and neither land nor cloud was discernible in the 
vastness about the galley. 

Yadar held little converse with Agor and the crew, 
after questioning them as to the reason of the ocean’s 
blackness, which was a thing that no man understood. 
Despair was upon him; but, standing at the bulwark, he 
watched the sky and wave with an alertness bom of his 
nomad life. Toward afternoon he descried far off a 
strange vessel with funereal purple sails, that drove stead 
ily on an eastering course against the mighty current. He 
called Agor’s attention to the vessel; and Agor, with a 
muttering of sailors’ oaths, told him that it was a ship be 
longing to the necromancers of Naat. 

Soon the purple sails were lost to vision; but a little 
later, Yadar perceived certain objects resembling human 
heads, that passed in the high-billowing water to the gal 
ley’s leeward. Deeming that no mortal living men could 
swim thus, and remembering that which Agor had said 
concerning the dead swimmers who went forth from 
Naat, Yadar was aware of such trepidation as a brave 
man may feel in the presence of things beyond nature. 
And he did not speak of the matter; and seemingly the 
headlike objects were not noticed by his companions. 

Still the galley drove on, its oarsmen sitting idle at the 
oars, and the captain standing listless beside the untended 
helm. 

Toward night, as the sun declined above that tumul 
tuous ebon ocean, it seemed that a great bank of thun 
der-cloud arose from the west, long and low-lying at first, 
but surging rapidly skyward with mountainous domes. 
Ever higher it loomed, revealing the menace as of piled 
cliffs and somber, awful sea-capes; but its form changed 
not in the fashion of clouds; and Yadar knew it at last for 
an island bulking far aloft in the long-rayed sunset. From 
it a shadow was thrown for leagues, darkening still more 
the sable waters, as if with the fall of untimely night; and 
in the shadow the foam-crests flashing upon hidden reefs 
were white as the bared teeth of death. And Yadar 
needed not the shrill, frightened cries of his companions 
to tell him that this was the terrible Isle of Naat. 


Direly the current swiftened, raging, as it raced onward 
for battle with the rock-fanged shore; and the voices of 
the mariners, praying loudly to their gods, were drowned 
by its clamor. Yadar, standing in the prow, gave only a 
silent prayer to the dim, fatal deity of his tribe; and his 
eyes searched the towering isle like those of a sea-flown 
hawk, seeing the bare horrific crags, and the spaces of 
dark forest creeping seaward between the crags, and the 
white mounting of monstrous breakers on a shadowy 
strand. 

Shrouded, and ominous of bale was the island’s aspect, 
and the heart of Yadar sank like a plummet in unsunned 
seas. As the galley hove nearer to land, he thought that 
he beheld people moving darkly, visible in the lapsing of 
surges on a low beach, and then hidden once more by 
foam and spindrift. Ere he saw them a second time, the 
galley was hurled with thunderous crashing and grinding 
on a reef buried beneath the torrent waters. The fore-part 
of its prow and bottom were broken in, and being lifted 
from the reef by a second comber, it filled instantly and 
sank. Of those who had sailed from Oroth, Yadar alone 
leapt free ere its foundering; but, since he was little 
skilled as a swimmer, he was drawn under quickly and 
was like to have drowned in the maelstroms of that evil 
sea. 

His senses left him, and in his brain, like a lost sun returned 
from yesteryear, he beheld the face of Dalili; and 
with Dalili, in a bright phantasmagoria, there came the 
happy days that had been ere his bereavement. The vi 
sions passed, and he awoke struggling, with the bitterness 
of the sea in his mouth, and its loudness in his ears, and 
its rushing darkness all about him. And, as his senses 
quickened, he became aware of a form that swam close 
beside him and arms that supported him amid the water. 

He lifted his head and saw dimly the pale neck and 
half-averted face of his rescuer, and the long black hair 
that floated from wave to wave. Touching the body at his 
side, he knew it for that of a woman. Mazed and wildered 
though he was by the sea’s buffeting, a sense of something 
familiar stirred within him, and he thought that he had 


known somewhere, at some former time, a woman with 
like hair and similar curving of cheek. And, trying to remember, 
he touched the woman again, and felt in his fin 
gers a strange coldness from her naked body. 

Miraculous was the woman’s strength and skill, for she 
rode easily the dreadful mounting and falling of the 
surges. Yadar, floating as in a cradle upon her arm, be 
held the nearing shore from the billows’ summits; and 
hardly it seemed that any swimmer, however able, could 
win alive through the wildness of that surf. Dizzily, at the 
last, they were hurled upward, as if the surf would fling 
them against the highest crag; but, as if checked by some 
enchantment, the wave fell with a slow, lazy undulation; 
and Yadar and his rescuer, released by its ebbing, lay un 
hurt on a shelfy beach. 

Uttering no word, nor turning to look at Yadar, the 
woman rose to her feet; and, beckoning him to follow, 
she moved away in the deathly blue dusk that had fallen 
upon Naat. Yadar, arising and following the woman, 
heard a strange and eery chanting of voices above the 
sea’s tumult, and saw a fire that burned weirdly, with the 
colors of driftwood, at some distance before him in the 
dusk. Straightly, toward the fire and the voices, the 
woman walked. And Yadar, with eyes grown used to that 
doubtful twilight, saw that the fire blazed in the mouth of 
a low-sunken cleft between crags that overloomed the 
beach; and behind the fire, like tall, evilly posturing shad 
ows, there stood the dark-clad figures of those who 
chanted. 

Now memory returned to him of that which the gal 
ley’s captain had said regarding the necromancers of Naat 
and their practices. The very sound of that chanting, al 
beit in an unknown tongue, seemed to suspend the heart- 
ward flowing of his veins, and to set the tomb’s chillness 
in his marrow. And though he was little learned in such 
matters, the thought came to him that the words uttered 
were of sorcerous import and power. 

Going forward, the woman bowed low before the chan 
ters, like a slave. The men, who were three in number, 
continued their incantation without pausing. Gaunt as 


starved herons they were, and great of stature, with a 
common likeness; and their sunk eyes were visible only 
by red sparks reflected within them from the blaze. And 
their eyes, as they chanted, seemed to glare afar on the 
darkling sea and on things hidden by dusk and distance. 
And Yadar, coming before them, was aware of swift hor 
ror and repugnance that made his gorge rise as if he had 
encountered, in a place given to death, the powerful evil 
ripeness of corruption. 

High leaped the fire, with a writhing of tongues like 
blue and green serpents coiling amid serpents of yellow. 
And the light flickered brightly on the face and breasts of 
that woman who had saved Yadar from the Black River; 
and he, beholding her closely, knew why she had stirred 
within him a dim remembrance: for she was none other 
than his lost love, Dalili! 

Forgetting the presence of the dark chanters, he sprang 
forward to clasp his beloved, crying out her name in an 
agony of rapture. But she answered him not, and responded 
to his embrace only with a faint trembling. And 
Yadar, sorely perplexed and dismayed, was aware of the 
deathly coldness that crept into his fingers and smote 
through his very raiment from her flesh. Mortally pale 
and languid were the lips that he kissed, and it seemed 
that no breath emerged between them, nor was there any 
rising and falling of the wan bosom against his. In the 
wide, beautiful eyes that she turned to him, he found only 
a drowsy voidness, and such recognition as a sleeper gives 
when but half awakened, relapsing quickly into slumber 
thereafter. 

“Art thou indeed Dalili?” he said. And she answered 
somnolently, in a toneless, indistinct voice, “I am Dalili.” 

To Yadar, baffled by mystery, forlorn and aching, it 
was as if she had spoken from a land farther away than 
all the weary leagues of his search for her. Fearing to un 
derstand the change that had come upon her, he said ten 
derly: 

“Surely thou knowest me, for I am thy lover, the 
Prince Yadar, who has sought thee through half the king 
doms of Earth, and has sailed afar for thy sake on the 


unshored sea.” And she replied like one bemused by 
some heavy drug, as if echoing his words without true 
comprehension: “Surely I know thee.” And to Yadar 
there was no comfort in her reply; and his concernment 
was not allayed by the parrotings with which she an 
swered all his other loving speeches and queries. 

He knew not that the three chanters had ceased their 
incantation; and, verily he had forgotten their presence. 
But as he stood holding the girl closely, the men came to 
ward him, and one of them clutched his arm. And the 
man hailed him by name and addressed him, though 
somewhat uncouthly, in a language spoken throughout 
many parts of , saying: “We bid thee welcome to 
the Isle of Naat.” 

Yadar, feeling a dread suspicion, interrogated the man 
fiercely: “What manner of beings are ye? And why is 
Dalili here? And what have ye done to her?” 

“I am Vacham, a necromancer,” the man replied, “and 
these others with me are my sons, Vokal and Uldulla, 
who are also necromancers. We dwell in a house behind 
the crags, and are attended by the drowned people that 
our sorcery has called up from the sea. Among our ser 
vants is this girl, Dalili, together with the crew of that 
ship in which she sailed from Oroth. Like the vessel in 
which thou earnest later, the ship was blown far asea and 
was taken by the Black River and wrecked finally on the 
reefs of Naat. My sons and I, chanting that powerful for 
mula which requires no use of circle or pentacle, sum 
moned ashore the drowned company: even as we have 
now summoned the crew of that other vessel, from which 
thou alone wert saved alive by the dead swimmer, at our 
command.” 

Vacham ended, and stood peering into the dusk in 
tently; and Yadar heard behind him a noise of slow foot 
steps coming upward across the shingle from the surf. 
Turning, he saw emerge from the livid twilight the old 
captain of that galley in which he had voyaged to Naat; 
and behind the captain were the sailors and oarsmen. 
With the paces of sleepwalkers they approached the fire 
light, the sea-water dripping heavily from their raiment 

and hair, and drooling from their mouths. Some were 
sorely bruised, and others came stumbling or dragging 
with limbs broken by the rocks on which the sea had 
flung them; and on their faces was the look of men who 
had suffered the doom of drowning. 

Stiffly, like automatons, they made obeisance to Va- 
cham and his sons, acknowledging thus their thralldom to 
those who had called them from deep death. In their glass- 
ily staring eyes there was no recognition of Yadar, no 
awareness of outward things; and they spoke only in dull, 
rotelike recognition of certain obscure words addressed to 
them by the necromancers. 

ToYadar, it was as if he too stood and moved like the 
living dead in a dark, hollow, half-conscious dream. 
Walking beside Dalili, and followed by those others, he 
was led by the enchanters through a dim ravine that 
wound secretly toward the uplands of Naat. In his heart 
there was small joy at the finding of Dalili; and his love 
was companioned with a sick despair. 

Vacham lit the way with a brand of driftwood plucked 
from the fire. Anon a bloated moon rose red as with sa 
nies-mingled blood, over the wild, racing sea; and before 
its orb had cleared to a deathlike paleness, they emerged 
from the gorge on a stony fell where stood the house of 
the three necromancers. 

The house was built of dark granite, with long low 
wings that crouched amid the foliage of close-grown cy 
presses. Behind it a cliff beetled; and above the cliff were 
somber slopes and ridges piled in the moonlight, rising 
afar toward the mountainous center of Naat. 

It seemed that the mansion was a place pre-empted by 
death: for no lights burned in its portals and windows; 
and a silence came from it to meet the stillness of the 
wan heavens. But, when the sorcerers neared the threshold, 
a word was spoken by Vacham, echoing distantly in the 
inner halls; and as if in answer, lamps glowed suddenly 
everywhere, filling the house with their monstrous yellow 
eyes; and people appeared instantly within the portals like 
bowing shadows. But the faces of these beings were 
blanched by the tomb’s pallor, and some were mottled 


with green decay, or marked by the tortuous gnawing of 
maggots. . . . 

In a great hall of the house, Yadar was bidden to seat 
himself at a table where Vacham and Vokal and Uldulla 
commonly sat alone during their meals. The table stood 
on a dais of gigantic flagstones; and below, in the main 
hall, the dead were gathered about other tables, number 
ing nearly two score; and among them sat the girl Dalili, 
looking never toward Yadar. He would have joined her, 
unwilling to be parted from her side: but a deep languor 
was upon him, as if an unspoken spell had enthralled his 
limbs and he could no longer move of his own volition. 

Dully he sat with his grim, taciturn hosts who, dwelling 
always with the silent dead, had assumed no little part of 
their manner. And he saw more clearly than before the 
common likeness of the three: for all, it seemed, were as 
brothers of one birth rather than parent and sons; and all 
were like ageless tilings, being neither old nor young in 
the fashion of ordinary men. And more and more was he 
aware of that weird evil which emanated from the three, 
powerful and abhorrent as an exhalation of hidden death. 

In the thralldom that weighed upon him, he scarcely 
marveled at the serving of that strange supper: though 
meats were brought in by no palpable agency, and wines 
poured out as if by the air itself; and the passing of the 
bearers to and fro was betrayed only by a rustle of doubt 
ful footsteps, and a light dullness that came and went. 

Mutely, with stiff gestures and movements, the dead 
began to eat at their tables. But the necromancers refrained 
from the victuals before them, in an attitude of 
waiting; and Vacham said to the nomad: “There are oth 
ers who will sup with us tonight.” And Yadar then per 
ceived that a vacant chair had been set beside the chair of 
Vacham. 

Anon, from an inner doorway, there entered with hasty 
strides a man of great thews and stature, naked, and 
brown almost to blackness. Savage of aspect was the 
man, and his eyes were dilated as with rage or terror, and 
his thick purple lips were flecked with foam. And behind 
him, lifting in menace their heavy, rusted scimitars, there 

came two of the dead seamen, like guards who attend a 
prisoner. 

“This man is a cannibal,” said Vacham. “Our servants 
have captured him in the forest beyond the mountains, 
which is peopled by such savages.” He added: “Only the 
strong and courageous are summoned living to this man 
sion. . . . Not idly, O Prince Yadar, wert thou chosen for 
such honor. Observe closely all that follows.” 

The savage had paused within the threshold, as if fear 
ing the hall’s occupants more than the weapons of his 
guards. One of the liches slashed his left shoulder with 
the rusty blade, and blood rilled from a deep wound as 
the cannibal came forward beneath that prompting. Con 
vulsively he trembled, like a frightened animal, looking 
wildly to either side for an avenue of escape; and only 
after a second prompting did he mount the dais and ap 
proach the necromancers’ table. But, after certain hol 
low-sounding words had been uttered by Vacham, the 
man seated himself, still trembling, in the chair beside the 
master, opposite to Yadar. And behind him, with high- 
raised weapons, there stationed themselves the ghastly 
guards, whose features were those of men a fortnight 
dead. 

“There is still another guest,” said Vacham. “He will 
come later; and we need not wait for him.” 

Without further ceremony he began to eat, and Yadar, 
though with little appetence, followed suit. Hardly did the 
prince perceive the savor of those viands with which his 
plate was piled; nor could he have sworn whether the vin 
tages he drank were sour or dulcet. His thoughts were di 
vided between Dalili and the strangeness and horror 
about him. 

As he ate and drank, his senses were sharpened 
weirdly, and he grew aware of eldritch shadows moving 
between the lamps, and heard the chill sibilance of whis 
pers that checked his very blood. And there came to him, 
from the peopled hall, every odor that is exhaled by mor 
tality between the recentness of death and the end of cor 
ruption. 

Vacham and his sons addressed themselves to the meal 

with the unconcern of those long used to such surround 
ings. But the cannibal, whose fear was still palpable, refused 
to touch the food before him. Blood, in two heavy 
rills, ran unceasingly down his bosom from his wounded 
shoulders, and dripped audibly on the stone flags. 

Finally, at the urging of Vacham, who spoke in the 
cannibal’s own tongue, he was persuaded to drink from a 
cup of wine. This wine was not the same that had been 
served to the rest of the company, being of a violet color, 
dark as the nightshade’s blossom, while the other wine 
was a poppy-red. Hardly had the man tasted it when he 
sank back in his chair with the appearance of one smitten 
helpless by palsy. The cup, rilling the remnant of its con 
tents, was still clutched in his rigid fingers; there was no 
movement, no trembling of his limbs; and his eyes were 
wide open and staring as if consciousness still remained 
within him. 

A dire suspicion sprang up in Yadar, and no longer 
could he eat the food and drink the wine of the necro 
mancers. And he was puzzled by the actions of his hosts 
who, abstaining likewise, turned in the chairs and peered 
steadily at a portion of the floor behind Vacham, between 
the table and the hall’s inner end. Yadar, rising a little in 
his seat, looked down across the table, and perceived a 
small hole in one of the flagstones. The hole was such as 
might be inhabited by a small anim al; but Yadar could 
not surmise the nature of a beast that burrowed in solid 
granite. 

In a loud clear voice, Vacham spoke the single word, 
“Esrit,” as if calling the name of one that he wished to 
summon. Not long thereafter, two little sparks of fire ap 
peared in the darkness of the hole, and from it sprang a 
creature having somewhat the size and form of a weasel, 
but even longer and thinne r. The creature’s fur was a 
rusted black, and its paws were like tiny hairless hands; 
and its beaded eyes of flaming yellow seemed to hold the 
malign wisdom and malevolence of a demon. Swiftly, 
with writhing movements that gave it the air of a furred 
serpent, it ran forward beneath the chair occupied by the 


cannibal, and began to drink greedily tbe pool of blood 
that had dripped down on the floor from his wounds. 

Then, while horror fastened upon the heart of Yadar, 
it leapt to the cannibal’s knees, and thence to his left 
shoulder, where the deepest wound had been inflicted. 
There the thin g applied itself to the still bleeding cut, 
from which it sucked in the fashion of a weasel; and the 
blood ceased to flow down on the man’s body. And the 
man stirred not in his chair; but his eyes still widened, 
slowly, with a horrible glaring, till the balls were isled in 
livid white; and his lips fell slackly apart, showing teeth 
that were strong and pointed as those of a shark. 

The necromancers had resumed their eating, with eyes 
attentive on the small bloodthirsty monster; and it came 
to Yadar that this was the other guest expected by Va- 
cham. Whether the thing was an actual weasel, or a sor 
cerer’s familiar, he did not know: but anger followed 
upon his horror before the plight of the cannibal; and, 
drawing a sword he had carried through all his travels, he 
sprang to his feet and would have tried to kill the mon 
ster. But Vacham described in the air a peculiar sign with 
his forefinger; and the prince’s arm was suspended in 
mid-stroke, and his fingers became weak as those of a 
babe, and the sword fell from his hand, ringing loudly on 
the dais. Thereafter, as if by the unspoken will of Va 
cham, he was constrained to seat himself again at the 
table. 

Insatiable, it seemed, was the thirst of the weasel-like 
creature: for, after many minutes had gone by, it contin 
ued to suck the blood of the savage. From moment to 
moment the man’s mighty thews became strangely 
shrunken, and the bones and taut sinews showed starkly 
beneath wrinkling folds of skin. His face was like the 
chapless face of death, his limbs were lean as those of an 
old mummy: but the thing that battened upon him had 
increased in size only so much as a stoat increases by 
sucking the blood of some farmyard fowl. 

By this token, Yadar knew that the thing was indeed a 
demon and was no doubt the familiar of Vacham. En 
tranced with terror, he sat regarding it, till the creature 


dropped from the dry bones and the skin of the cannibal, 
and ran with an evil writhing and slithering to its hole in 
the flagstone. 

Weird was the life that now began for Yadar in the 
house of the necromancers. Upon him there rested always 
the malign thralldom that had overpowered him during 
that first supper; and he moved as one who could not 
wholly awake from some benumbing dream. It seemed 
that his volition was in some way controlled by those 
masters of the living dead. But, more than this, he was 
held by the old enchantment of his love for Dalili: though 
the love had now turned to a spell of despair. 

Something he learned of the necromancers and their 
mode of existence: though Vacham spoke seldom except 
with grim ironies; and the sons of Vacham were taciturn 
as the dead. He learned that the weasel-like familiar, 
whose name was Esrit, had undertaken to serve Vacham 
for a given term, receiving in guerdon, at the full of each 
moon, the blood of a living man chosen for redoubtable 
strength and valor. And it was clear to Yadar that, in default of some miracle, or sorcery beyond that of the nec 
romancers, his days of life were limited by the moon’s pe 
riod. For, other than himself and the masters, there was 
no person in all that mansion who had not already passed 
through the bitter gates of death. . . . 

Lonely was the house, standing far apart from all 
neighbors. Other necromancers dwelt on the shores of 
Naat; but betwixt these and the hosts of Yadar there was 
little intercourse. And beyond the wild mountains that di 
vided the isle, there dwelt only certain tribes of anthropo 
phagi, who warred with each other in the black woods of 
pine and cypress. 

The dead were housed in deep catacomb-like caves be 
hind the mansion, lying all night in stone coffins, and 
coming forth in daily resurrection to do the tasks or 
dained by the masters. Some tilled the rocky gardens on a 
slope sheltered from sea-wind; others tended the sable 
goats and cattle; and still others were sent out as divers 
for pearls in the sea that ravened prodigiously, not to be 
dared by living swimmers, on the bleak atolls and head- 


lands homed with granite. Of such pearls, Vacham had 
amassed a mighty store through years exceeding the com 
mon span of life. And sometimes, in a ship that sailed 
contrary to the Black River, he or one of his sons would 
voyage to  with certain of the dead for crew, and 
would trade the pearls for such things as their magic was 
unable to raise up in Naat. 

Strange it was to Yadar, to see the companions of his 
voyage passing to and fro with the other liches, greeting 
him only in mindless echo of his own salutations. And 
bitter it was, yet never without a dim sorrowful sweetness, 
to behold Dalili and speak with her, trying vainly to revive 
the lost ardent love in a heart that had gone fathom- 
deep into oblivion and had not returned therefrom. And 
always, with a desolate yearning, he seemed to grope to 
ward her across a gulf more terrible than the stemless tide 
that poured for ever about the Isle of the Necromancers. 

Dalili, who had swum from childhood in the sunken 
lakes of Zyra, was among those enforced to dive for 
pearls. Often Yadar would accompany her to the shore 
and await her return from the mad surges; and at whiles 
he was tempted to fling himself after her and find, if such 
were possible, the peace of very death. This he would 
surely have done: but, amid the eery wilderments of his 
plight, and the gray webs of sorcery woven about him, it 
seemed that his old strength and resolution were wholly 
lacking. 

One day, toward sunset-time, as the month drew to its 
end, Vokal and Uldulla approached the prince where he 
stood waiting on a rock-walled beach while Dalili dived 
far out in the torrent waters. Speaking no word, they 
beckoned to him with furtive signs; and Yadar, vaguely 
curious as to their intent, suffered them to lead him from 
the beach and by perilous paths that wound from crag to 
crag above the curving seashore. Ere the fall of darkness, 
they came to a small landlocked harbor whose existence 
had been heretofore unsuspected by the nomad. In that 
placid bay, beneath the deep umbrage of the isle, there 
rode a galley with somber purple sails, resembling the ship 


that Yadar had discerned moving steadily toward Zo- 
thique against the full tide of the Black River. 

Yadar was much bewondered, nor could he divine why 
they had brought him to the hidden harbor, nor the im 
port of their gestures as they pointed out the strange ves 
sel. Then, in a hushed and covert whisper, as if fearing to 
be overheard in that remote place, Vokal said to him: 

“If thou wilt aid my brother and me in the execution of 
a certain plan, thou shalt have the use of yonder galley in 
quitting Naat. And with thee, if such be thy desire, thou 
shalt take the girl Dalili, together with certain of the dead 
mariners for oarsmen. Favored by the powerful gales 
which our enchantments will evoke for thee, thou shalt 
sail against the Black River and return to . . . . 
But if thou helpest us not, then shall the weasel Esrit 
suck thy blood, till the last member of thy body has been 
emptied thereof; and Dalili shall remain as the bond-slave 
of Vacham, toiling for his avarice by day in the dark wa 
ters . . . and perchance serving his lust by night.” 

At the promise of Vokal, Yadar felt something of hope 
and manhood revive within him, and it seemed that the 
baleful sorcery of Vacham was lifted from his mind; and 
an indignation against Vacham was awakened by Vokal’s 
hintings. And he said quickly: “I will aid thee in thy 
plan, whatever it may be, if such aid is within my power to 
give.” 

Then, with many fearful glances about and behind him, 
Uldulla took up the furtive whispering: 

“It is our thought that Vacham has lived beyond the 
allotted term, and has imposed his authority upon us too 
long. We, his sons, grow old: and we deem it no more 
than rightful that we should inherit the stored treasures 
and the magical supremacy of our father ere age has debarred us from their enjoyment. Therefore we seek thy 
help in the slaying of Vacham.” 

It came to Yadar, after brief reflection, that the killing 
of the necromancer should be held in all ways a righteous 
deed, and one to which he could lend himself without demeaning of his valor or his manhood. So he said without 
demur: “I will help thee in this thing.” 


Seeming greatly emboldened by Yadar’s consent, 
Vokal spoke again in his turn, saying: “This thing must 
be accomplished ere tomorrow’s eve, which will bring a 
full-rounded moon from the Black River upon Naat, and 
will call the weasel-demon Esrit from his burrow. And to 
morrow’s forenoon is the only time when we can take 
Vacham unaware in his chamber. During those hours, as 
is his wont, he will peer entranced on a magic mirror that 
yields visions of the outer sea, and the ships sailing over 
the sea, and the lands lying beyond. And we must slay 
him before the mirror, striking swiftly and surely ere he 
awakens from his trance.” 

At the hour set for the deed, Vokal and Uldulla came 
to Yadar where he stood awaiting them in the outer hall. 
Each of the brothers bore in his right hand a long and 
coldly glittering scimitar; and Vokal also carried in his 
left a like weapon, which he offered to the prince, ex 
plaining that these scimitars had been tempered to a muttering 
of lethal runes, and inscribed afterward with un 
speakable death-spells. Yadar, preferring his own sword, 
declined the wizard weapon; and, delaying no more, the 
three went hastily and with all possible stealth toward 
Vacham’s chamber. 

The house was empty, for the dead had all gone forth 
to their labors; nor was there any whisper or shadow of 
those invisible beings, whether sprites of the air or mere 
phantoms, that waited upon Vacham and served him in 
sundry ways. Silently the three came to the portals of the 
chamber, where entrance was barred only by a black 
arras wrought with the signs of night in silver, and bor 
dered with a repetition of the five names of the archfiend 
Thasaidon in scarlet thread. The brothers paused, as if 
fearing to lift the arras; but Yadar, unhesitating, held it 
aside and passed into the chamber; and the twain fol 
lowed him quickly as if for shame of their poltroonery. 

The room was large, high-vaulted, and lit by a dim 
window looking forth between unpruned cypresses toward 
the black sea. No flame arose from the myriad lamps to 
assist that baffled daylight; and shadows brimmed the 
place like a spectral fluid, through which the vessels of 


wizardry, the great censers and alembics and braziers, 
seemed to quiver like animate things. A little past the 
room’s center, his back to the doorway, Vacham sat on 
an ebon trivet before the mirror of clairvoyance, which 
was wrought from electrum in the form of a huge delta, 
and was held obliquely aloft by a serpenting copper arm. 
The mirror flamed brightly in the shadow, as if lit by 
some splendor of unknown source; and the intruders were 
dazzled by glimpsings of its radiance as they went for 
ward. 

It seemed that Vacham had indeed been overcome by 
the wonted trance, for he peered rigidly into the mirror, 
immobile as a seated mummy. The brothers held back, 
while Yadar, thinking them close behind him, stole to 
ward the necromancer with lifted blade. As he drew 
nearer, he perceived that Vacham held a great scimitar 
across his knees; and, deeming that the sorcerer was per 
haps forewarned, Yadar ran quickly up behind him and 
aimed a powerful stroke at his neck. But, even while he 
aimed, his eyes were blinded by the strange brightness of 
the mirror, as though a sun had blazed into them from its 
depth across the shoulder of Vacham; and the blade 
swerved and bit slantingly into the collar bone, so that the 
necromancer, though sorely wounded, was saved from decapitation. 

Now it seemed likely that Vacham had foreknown the 
attempt to slay him, and had thought to do battle with his 
assailers when they came. But, sitting in pretended trance, 
he had no doubt been overpowered against his win by the 
weird brilliancy, and had fallen into a mantic slumber. 

Fierce and swift as a wounded tiger, he leapt from the 
trivet, swinging his scimitar aloft as he turned upon 
Yadar. The prince, still blinded, could neither strike again 
nor avoid the stroke of Vacham; and the scimitar clove 
deeply into his right shoulder, and he fell mortally 
wounded and lay with his head upheld a little against the 
base of the snakish copper arm that supported the mirror. 

Lying there, with his life ebbing slowly, he beheld how 
Vokal sprang forward as with the desperation of one who 
sees imminent death, and hewed mightily into the neck of 


Vacham. The head, almost sundered from the body, top 
pled and hung by a strip of flesh and skin; yet Vacham, 
reeling, did not fall or die at once, as any mortal man 
should have done: but, still animated by the wizard 
power within him, he ran about the chamber, striking great 
blows at the parricides. Blood gushed from his neck like a 
fountain as he ran; and his head swung to and fro like a 
monstrous pendulum on his breast. And all his blows 
went wild because he could no longer see to direct them, 
and his sons avoided him agilely, hewing into him often 
times as he went past. And sometimes he stumbled over 
the fallen Yadar, or struck the mirror of electrum with 
his sword, making it ring like a deep bell. And sometimes 
the battle passed beyond sight of the dying prince, toward 
the window that looked seaward; and he heard strange 
crashings, as if some of the magic furniture were shat 
tered by the strokes of the warlock; and there were loud 
breathings from the sons of Vacham, and the dull sound 
of blows that went home as they still pursued their father. 
And anon the fight returned before Yadar, and he 
watched it with dimmin g eyes. 

Dire beyond telling was that combat, and Vokal and 
Uldulla panted like spent runners ere the end. But, after a 
while, the power seemed to fail in Vacham with the 
draining of his life-blood. He staggered from side to side 
as he ran, and his paces halted, and his blows became 
enfeebled. His raiment hung upon him in blood-soaked 
rags from the slashings of his sons, and certain of his 
members were half sundered, and his whole body was 
hacked and overscored like an executioner’s block. At 
last, with a dexterous blow, Vokal severed the thin strip 
by which the head still depended; and the head dropped 
and rolled with many reboundings about the floor. 

Then, with a wild tottering, as if still fain to stand 
erect, the body of Vacham toppled down and lay thrash 
ing like a great, headless fowl, heaving itself up and drop 
ping back again, incessantly. Never, with all its rearings, 
did the body quite regain its feet: but the scimitar was still 
held firmly in the right hand, and the corpse laid blindly 
about it, striking from the floor with sidelong slashes, or 


slicing down as it rose half-way to a standing posture. 
And the head still rolled, unresting, about the chamber, 
and maledictions came from its mouth in a pipy voice no 
louder than that of a child. 

At this, Yadar saw that Vokal and Uldulla drew back, 
as if somewhat aghast; and they turned toward the door, 
manifestly intending to quit the room. But before Vokal, 
going first, had lifted the portal-arras, there slithered be 
neath its folds the long, black, snakish body of the wea 
sel-familiar, Esrit. And the familiar launched itself in air, 
reaching at one bound the throat of Vokal; and it clung 
there with teeth fastened in his flesh, sucking his blood 
steadily, while he staggered about the room and strove in 
vain to tear it away with maddened fingers. 

Uldulla, it seemed, would have made some attempt to 
kill the creature, for he cried out, adjuring Vokal to stand 
firm, and raised his sword as if waiting for a chance to 
strike at Esrit. But Vokal seemed to hear him not, or was 
too frenzied to obey his adjuration. And at that instant 
the head of Vacham, in its rolling, bounded against Ul- 
dulla’s feet; and the head, snarling ferociously, caught the 
hem of his robe with its teeth and hung there as he 
sprang back in panic fright. And though he sliced wildly 
at the head with his scimitar, the teeth refused to relin 
quish their hold. So he dropped his garment, and leaving 
it there with the still pendant head of his father, he fled 
naked from the room. And even as Uldulla fled, the life 
departed from Yadar, and he saw and heard no 
more. . . . 

Dimly, from the depths of oblivion, Yadar beheld the 
flaring of remote lights, and heard the chanting of a far 
voice. It seemed that he swam upward from black seas 
toward the voice and the lights, and he saw as if through 
a thin, watery film the face of Uldulla standing above him, 
and the f umin g of strange vessels in the chamber of Va 
cham. And it seemed that Uldulla said to him: “Arise 
from death, and be obedient in all things to me the mas 
ter.” 

So, in answer to the unholy rites and incantations of 
necromancy, Yadar arose to such life as was possible for 


a resurrected lich. And he walked again, with the black 
gore of his wound in a great clot on his shoulder and 
breast, and made reply to Uldulla in the fashion of the 
living dead. Vaguely, and as matters of no import, he remembered 
something of his death and the circumstances 
preceding it; and vainly, with filmed eyes, in the wrecked 
chamber, he looked for the sundered head and body of 
Vacham, and for Vokal and the weasel-demon. 

Then it seemed that Uldulla said to him: “Follow me;” 
and he went forth with the necromancer into the light of 
the red, swollen moon that had soared from the Black 
River upon Naat. There, on the fell before the house, was 
a vast heap of ashes where coals glowed and glared like 
living eyes. Uldulla stood in contemplation before the 
heap; and Yadar stood beside him, knowing not that he 
gazed on the bumt-out pyre of Vacham and Vokal, 
which the dead slaves had built and fired at Uldulla’s di 
rection. 

Then, with shrill, eery wailings, a wind came suddenly 
from the sea, and lifting all the ashes and sparks in a 
great, swirling cloud, it swept them upon Yadar and the 
necromancer. The twain could hardly stand against that 
wind, and their hair and beards and garments were filled 
with the leavings of the pyre, and both were blinded 
thereby. Then the wind went up, sweeping the cloud of 
ashes over the mansion and into its doorways and win 
dows; and through all its apartments. And for many days 
thereafter, little swirls of ash rose up under the feet of 
those who passed along the halls; and though there was a 
daily plying of besoms by the dead at Uldulla’s injunc 
tion, it seemed that the place was never again wholly 
clean of those ashes. ... 

Regarding Uldulla, there remains little enough to be 
told: for his lordship over the dead was a brief thing. 
Abiding always alone, except for those liches who at 
tended him, he became possessed by a weird melancholy 
that turned quickly toward madness. No longer could he 
conceive the aims and objects of life; and the languor of 
death rose up around him like a black, stealthy sea, full 
of soft murmurs and shadow-like arms that were fain to 


draw him downward. Soon he came to envy the dead, 
and to deem their lot desirable above any other. So, car 
rying that scimitar he had used at the slaying of Vacham, 
he went into his father’s chamber, which he had not en 
tered since the raising up of Prince Yadar. There, beside 
the sun-bright mirror of divinations, he disembowled him 
self, and fell amid the dust and the cobwebs that had 
gathered heavily over all. And, since there was no other 
necromancer to bring him back even to a semblance of 
life, he lay rotting and undisturbed for ever after. 

But in the gardens of Vacham the dead people still la 
bored, heedless of Uldulla’s passing; and they still kept 
the goats and cattle, and dived for pearls in the dark, tor 
rent main. 

And Yadar, being with Dalili in that state now com 
mon to them both, was drawn to her with a ghostly 
yearning; and he felt a ghostly comfort in her nearness. 
The quick despair that had racked him aforetime, and the 
long torments of desire and separation, were as things 
faded and forgot; and he shared with Dalili a shadowy 
love and a dim contentment. 


The Empire of The Necromancers 


The legend of Mmatmuor and Sodosma shall arise only 
in the latter cycles of Earth, when the glad legends of the 
prime have been forgotten. Before the time of its telling, 
many epochs shall have passed away, and the seas shall 
have fallen in their beds, and new continents shall have 
come to birth. Perhaps, in that day, it will serve to be 
guile for a little the black weariness of a dying race, grown 
hopeless of all but oblivion. I tell the tale as men shall tell 
it in , the last continent, beneath a dim sun and 
sad heavens where the stars come out in terrible bright 
ness before eventide. 


I Mmatmuor and Sodosma were necromancers who 
came from the dark isle of Naat, to practise their baleful 
arts in Tinarath, beyond the shrunken seas. But they did 
not prosper in Tinarath: for death was deemed a holy 
thing by the people of that gray country; and the nothing 
ness of the tomb was not lightly to be desecrated; and the 
raising up of the dead by necromancy was held in abomi 
nation. 

So, after a short interval, Mmatmuor and Sodosma 
were driven forth by the anger of the inhabitants, and 
were compelled to flee toward Cincor, a desert of the 
south, which was peopled only by the bones and mum 
mies of a race that the pestilence had slain in former 
time. 

The land into which they went lay drear and leprous 
and ashen below the huge, ember-colored sun. Its crum 
bling rocks and deathly solitudes of sand would have 
struck terror to the hearts of common men; and, since 
they had been thrust out in that barren place without 
food or sustenance, the plight of the sorcerers might well 
have seemed a desperate one. But, smiling secretly, with 
the air of conquerors who tread the approaches of a 
long-coveted realm, Sodosma and Mmatmuor walked 
steadily on into Cincor. 

Unbroken before them, through fields devoid of trees 
and grass, and across the channels of dried-up rivers, 
there ran the great highway by which travelers had gone 
formerly between Cincor and Tinarath. Here they met no 
living thing; but soon they came to the skeletons of a 
horse and its rider, lying full in the road, and wearing still 
the sumptuous harness and raiment which they had worn 
in the flesh. And Mmatmuor and Sodosma paused before 
the piteous bones, on which no shred of corruption remained; 
and they smiled evilly at each other. 

“The steed shall be yours,” said Mmatmuor, “since 
you are a little the elder of us two, and are thus entitled 


to precedence; and the rider shall serve us both and be 
the first to acknowledge fealty to us in Cincor.” 

Then, in the ashy sand by the wayside, they drew a 
threefold circle; and standing together at its center, they 
performed the abominable rites that compel the dead to 
arise from tranquil nothingness and obey henceforward, 
in all things, the dark will of the necromancer. Afterward 
they sprinkled a pinch of magic powder on the nostril- 
holes of the man and the horse; and the white bones, 
creaking mournfully, rose up from where they had lain 
and stood in readiness to serve their masters. 

So, as had been agreed between them, Sodosma 
mounted the skeleton steed and took up the jeweled reins, 
and rode in an evil mockery of Death on his pale horse; 
while Mmatmuor trudged on beside him, leaning lightly 
on an ebon staff; and the skeleton of the man, with its 
rich raiment flapping loosely, followed behind the two 
like a servitor. 

After a while, in the gray waste, they found the rem 
nant of another horse and rider, which the jackals had 
spared and the sun had dried to the leanness of old mum 
mies. These also they raised up from death; and Mmat 
muor bestrode the withered charger; and the two magi 
cians rode on in state, like errant emperors, with a lich 
and a skeleton to attend them. Other bones and charnel 
remnants of men and beasts, to which they came anon, 
were duly resurrected in like fashion; so that they gath 
ered to themselves an ever-swelling train in their progress 
through Cincor. 

Along the way, as they neared Yethlyreom, which had 
been the capital, they found numerous tombs and necro- 
poli, inviolate still after many ages, and containing 
swathed m ummi es that had scarcely withered in death. 
All these they raised up and called from sepulchral night 
to do their bidding. Some they commanded to sow and 
till the desert fields and hoist water from the sunken 
wells; others they left at diverse tasks, such as the mum 
mies had performed in life. The century-long silence was 
broken by the noise and tumult of myriad activities; and 
the lank liches of weavers toiled at their shuttles; and the 


corpses of plowmen followed their furrows behind carrion 
oxen. 

Weary with their strange journey and their oft-repeated 
incantations, Mmatmuor and Sodosma saw before them 
at last, from a desert hill, the lofty spires and fair, unbro 
ken domes of Yethlyreom, steeped in the darkening stag 
nant blood of ominous sunset. 

“It is a goodly land,” said Mmatmuor, “and you and I 
will share it between us, and hold dominion over all its 
dead, and be crowned as emperors on the morrow in 
Yethlyreom.” 

“Aye,” replied Sodosma, “for there is none living to 
dispute us here; and those we have summoned from the 
tomb shall move and breathe only at our dictation, and 
may not rebel against us.” 

So, in the blood-red twilight that thickened with pur 
ple, they entered Yethlyreom and rode on among the 
lofty, lampless mansions, and installed themselves with 
their grisly retinue in that stately and abandoned palace, 
where the dynasty of Nimboth emperors had reigned for 
two thousand years with dominion over Cincor. 

In the dusty golden halls, they lit the empty lamps of 
onyx by means of their cunning sorcery, and supped on 
royal viands, provided from past years, which they 
evoked in like manner. Ancient and imperial wines were 
poured for them in moonstone cups by the fleshless hands 
of their servitors; and they drank and feasted and reveled 
in phantasmagoric pomp, deferring till the morrow the 
resurrection of those who lay dead in Yethlyreom. 

They rose betimes, in the dark crimson dawn, from the 
opulent palace beds in which they had slept; for much remained 
to be done. Everywhere in the forgotten city, they 
went busily to and fro, working their spells on the people 
that had died in the last year of the pest and had lain un 
buried. And having accomplished this, they passed be 
yond Yethlyreom into that other city of high tombs and 
mighty mausoleums, in which lay the Nimboth emperors 
and empresses and the more consequential citizens and 
nobles of Cincor. 

Here, they bade their skeleton slaves to break in the 


sealed doors with hammers; and then, with their sinful, 
tyrannous incantations, they called forth the imperial 
mummies, even to the oldest of the dynasty, all of whom 
came walking stiffly, with lightless eyes, in rich swathings 
sewn with flame-bright jewels. And also, later, they 
brought forth to a semblance of life many generations of 
courtiers and dignitaries. 

Moving in solemn pageant, with dark and haughty and 
hollow faces, the dead emperors and empresses of Cincor 
made obeisance to Mmatmuor and Sodosma, and at 
tended them like a train of captives all through the streets 
of Yethlyreom. Afterward, in the immense throne-room 
of the palace, the necromancers mounted the high double 
throne, where the rightful rulers had sat with their con 
sorts. Amid the assembled emperors, in gorgeous and 
funereal state, they were invested with sovereignty by the 
sere hands of the mummy of Hestaiyon, earliest of the 
Nimboth line, who had ruled in half-mythic years. Then 
all the descendents of Hestaiyon, crowding the room in a 
great throng, acclaimed with toneless, echo-like voices the 
dominion of Mmatmuor and Sodosma. 

Thus did the outcast necromancers find for themselves 
an empire and a subject people in the desolate, barren 
land where the men of Tinarath had driven them forth to 
perish. Reigning supreme over all the dead of Cincor, by 
virtue of their malign magic, they exercised a baleful des 
potism. Tribute was borne to them by fleshless porters 
from outlying realms; and plague-eaten corpses, and tall 
mummies scented with mortuary balsams, went to and fro 
upon their errands in Yethlyreom, or heaped before their 
greedy eyes, from inexhaustible vaults, the cobweb-black 
ened gems of antique time. 

Dead laborers made their palace gardens to bloom 
again with long-perished flowers; liches and skeletons 
toiled for them in the mines, or reared superb, fantastic 
towers of the dying sun. Chamberlains and princes of old 
time were their cup-bearers; and stringed instruments 
were plucked for their delight by the slim hands of em 
presses with golden hair that had come forth untarnished 
from the night of the tomb. Those that were fairest. 


whom the plague and the worm had not ravaged over 
much, they took for their lemans and made to serve their 
necrophilic lust. 


n 

In all things, the people of Cincor performed the ac 
tions of life at the will of Mmatmuor and Sodosma. They 
spoke, they moved, they ate and drank as in life. They 
heard and saw and felt with a similitude of the senses that 
had been theirs before death; but their brains were en 
thralled by a dreadful necromancy. They recalled but 
dimly their former existence; and the state to which they 
had been summoned was empty and troublous and 
shadow-like. Their blood ran chill and sluggish, mingled 
with water of Lethe; and the vapors of Lethe clouded 
their eyes. 

Dumbly they obeyed the dictates of their tyrannous 
lords, without rebellion or protest, but filled with a vague, 
illimitable weariness such as the dead must know, when 
having drunk of eternal sleep, they are called back once 
more to the bitterness of mortal being. They knew no 
passion or desire, or delight, only the black languor of 
their awakening from Lethe, and a gray, ceaseless longing 
to return to that interrupted slumber. 

Youngest and last of the Nimboth emperors was H- 
leiro, who had died in the first month of the plague, and 
had lain in his high-built mausoleum for two hundred 
years before the coming of the necromancers. 

Raised up with his people and his fathers to attend the 
tyrants, Illeiro had resumed the emptiness of existence 
without question and had felt no surprise. He had ac 
cepted his own resurrection and that of his ancestors as 
one accepts the indignities and marvels of a dream. He 
knew that he had come back to a faded sun, to a hollow 
and spectral world, to an order of things in which his 
place was merely that of an obedient shadow. But at first 
he was troubled only, like the others, by a dim weariness 
and a pale hunger for the lost oblivion. 

Drugged by the magic of his overlords, weak from the 


age-long nullity of death, he beheld like a somnambulist 
the enormities to which his fathers were subjected. Yet, 
somehow, after many days, a feeble spark awoke in the 
sodden twilight of his mind. 

Like something lost and irretrievable, beyond prodi 
gious gulfs, he recalled the pomp of his reign in Yethly- 
reom, and the golden pride and exultation that had been 
his in youth. And recalling it, he felt a vague stirring of 
revolt, a ghostly resentment against the magicians who 
had haled him forth to this calamitous mockery of life. 
Darkly he began to grieve for his fallen state, and the 
mournful plight of his ancestors and his people. 

Day by day, as a cup-bearer in the halls where he had 
ruled aforetime, Illeiro saw the doings of Mmatmuor and 
Sodosma. He saw their caprices of cruelty and lust, their 
growing drunkenness and gluttony. He watched them 
wallow in their necromantic luxury, and become lax with 
indolence, gross with indulgence. They neglected the 
study of their art, they forgot many of their spells. But 
still they ruled, mighty and formidable; and, lolling on 
couches of purple and rose, they planned to lead an army 
of the dead against Tinarath. 

Dreaming of conquest, and of vaster necromancies, 
they grew fat and slothful as worms that have installed 
themselves in a charnel rich with corruption. And pace by 
pace with their laxness and tyranny, the fire of rebellion 
mounted in the shadowy heart of Illeiro, like a flame that 
struggles with Lethean damps. And slowly, with the wax 
ing of his wrath, there returned to him something of the 
strength and firmness that had been his in life. Seeing the 
turpitude of the oppressors, and knowing the wrong that 
had been done to the helpless dead, he heard in his brain 
the clamor of stifled voices demanding vengeance. 

Among his fathers, through the palace-halls of Yethly- 
reom, Illeiro moved silently at the bidding of the masters, 
or stood awaiting their command. He poured in their 
cups of onyx the amber vintages, brought by wizardry 
from hills beneath a younger sun; he submitted to their 
contumelies and insults. And night by night he watched 


them nod in their drunkenness, till they fell asleep, 
flushed and gross, amid their arrogated splendor. 

There was little speech among the living dead; and son 
and father, daughter and mother, lover and beloved, went 
to and fro without sign of recognition, making no com 
ment on their evil lot. But at last, one midnight, when the 
tyrants lay in slumber, and the flames wavered in the nec 
romantic lamps, Bleiro took counsel with Hestaiyon, his 
eldest ancestor, who had been famed as a great wizard in 
fable and was reputed to have known the secret lore of 
antiquity. 

Hestaiyon stood apart from the others, in a comer of 
the shadowy hall. He was brown and withered in his 
crumbling mummy-cloths; and his lightless obsidian eyes 
appeared to gaze still upon nothingness. He seemed not 
to have heard the questions of Bleiro; but at length, in a 
dry, rustling whisper, he responded: 

“I am old, and the night of the sepulcher was long, and 
I have forgotten much. Yet, groping backward across the 
void of death, it may be that I shall retrieve something of 
my former wisdom; and between us we shall devise a 
mode of deliverance.” And Hestaiyon searched among 
the shreds of memory, as one who reaches into a place 
where the worm has been and the hidden archives of old 
time have rotted in their covers; till at last he remem 
bered, and said: 

“I recall that I was once a mi ghty wizard; and among 
other things, I knew the spells of necromancy, but em 
ployed them not, deeming their use and the raising up of 
the dead an abhorrent act Also, I possessed other knowl 
edge; and perhaps, among the remnants of that ancient 
lore, there is something which may serve to guide us now. 
For I recall a dim, dubitable prophecy, made in the pri 
mal years, at the founding of Yethlyreom and the empire 
of Cincor. The prophecy was, that an evil greater than 
death would befall the emperors and the people of Cincor 
in future time; and that the first and the last of the Nim- 
both dynasty, conferring together, would effect a mode of 
release and the lifting of the doom. The evil was not 
named in the prophecy; but it was said that the two em- 


perors would learn the solution of their problem by the 
breaking of an ancient clay image that guards the nether 
most vault below the imperial palace in Yethlyreom.” 

Then, having heard this prophecy from the faded lips 
of his forefather, Illeiro mused a while, and said: 

“I remember now an afternoon in early youth, when 
searching idly through the unused vaults of our palace, as 
a boy might do, I came to the last vault and found 
therein a dusty, uncouth image of clay, whose form and 
countenance were strange to me. And, knowing not the 
prophecy, I turned away in disappointment, and went 
back as idly as I had come, to seek the moted sunlight.” 

Then, stealing away from their heedless kinfolk, and 
carrying jeweled lamps they had taken from the hall, 
Hestaiyon and Illeiro went downward by subterranean 
stairs beneath the palace; and, threading like implacable 
furtive shadows the maze of nighted corridors, they came 
at last to the lowest crypt. 

Here, in the black dust and clotted cobwebs of an im 
memorial past, they found, as had been decreed, the clay 
image, whose rude features were those of a forgotten 
earthly god. And Illeiro shattered the image with a frag 
ment of stone; and he and Hestaiyon took from its hollow 
center a great sword of unrusted steel, and a heavy key of 
untarnished bronze, and tablets of bright brass on which 
were inscribed the various things to be done, so that Cin- 
cor should be rid of the dark reign of the necromancers 
and the people should win back to oblivious death. 

So, with the key of untarnished bronze, Illeiro un 
locked, as the tablets had instructed him to do, a low and 
narrow door at the end of the nethermost vault, beyond 
the broken image; and he and Hestaiyon saw, as had 
been prophesied, the coiling steps of somber stone that 
led downward to an undiscovered abyss, where the 
sunken fires of earth still burned. And leaving Illeiro to 
ward the open door, Hestaiyon took up the sword of un 
rusted steel in his thin hand, and went back to the hall 
where the necromancers slept, lying a-sprawl on their 
couches of rose and purple, with the wan, bloodless dead 
about them in patient ranks. 

Upheld by the ancient prophecy and the lore of the 
bright tablets, Hestaiyon lifted the great sword and struck 
off the head of Mmatmuor and the head of Sodosma, 
each with a single blow. Then, as had been directed, he 
quartered the remains with mighty strokes. And the nec 
romancers gave up their unclean lives, and lay supine, 
without movement, adding a deeper red to the rose and a 
brighter hue to the sad purple of their couches. 

Then, to his kin, who stood silent and listless, hardly 
knowing their liberation, the venerable mummy of Hestai 
yon spoke in sere murmurs, but authoritatively, as a king 
who issues commands to his children. The dead emperors 
and empresses stirred, like autumn leaves in a sudden 
wind, and a whisper passed among them and went forth 
from the palace, to be communicated at length, by devious ways, to all the dead of Cincor. 

All that night, and during the blood-dark day that fol 
lowed, by wavering torches or the light of the failing sun, 
an endless army of plague-eaten liches, of tattered skele 
tons, poured in a ghastly torrent through the streets of 
Yethlyreom and along the palace-hall where Hestaiyon 
stood guard above the slain necromancers. Unpausing, 
with vague, fixed eyes, they went on like driven shadows, 
to seek the subterranean vaults below the palace, to pass 
through the open door where Illeiro waited in the last 
vault, and then to wend downward by a thousand thou 
sand steps to the verge of that gulf in which boiled the 
ebbing fires of earth. There, from the verge, they flung 
themselves to a second death and the clean annihilation 
of the bottomless flames. 

But, after all had gone to their release, Hestaiyon still 
remained, alone in the fading sunset, beside the cloven 
corpses of Mmatmuor and Sodosma. There, as the tablets 
had directed him to do, he made trial of those spells of 
elder necromancy which he had known in his former wis 
dom, and cursed the dismembered bodies with that per 
petual life-in-death which Mmatmuor and Sodosma had 
sought to inflict upon the people of Cincor. And maledic 
tions came from the pale lips, and the heads rolled horri 
bly with glaring eyes, and the limbs and torsos writhed on 


their imperial couches amid clotted blood. Then, with no 
backward look, knowing that all was done as had been 
ordained and predicted from the first, the mummy of 
Hestaiyon left the necromancers to their doom, and went 
wearily through the nighted labyrinth of vaults to rejoin 
Dleiro. 

So, in tranquil silence, with no further need of words, 
Hleiro and Hestaiyon passed through the open door of the 
nether vault, and Hleiro locked the door behind them 
with its key of untarnished bronze. And thence, by the 
coiling stairs, they wended their way to the verge of the 
sunken flames and were one with their kinfolk and their 
people in the last, ultimate nothingness. 

But of Mmatmuor and Sodosma, men say that their 
quartered bodies crawl to and fro to this day in Yethly- 
reom, finding no peace or respite from their doom of 
life-in-death, and seeking vainly through the black maze 
of nether vaults the door that was locked by Illeiro. 


The Master of the Crabs 


I remember that I grumbled a little when Mior Lumivix 
awakened me. The past evening had been a tedious one 
with its unpleasant familiar vigil, during which I had nod 
ded often. From sunfall till' the setting of Scorpio, which 
occurred well after midnight at that season, it had been 
my duty to tend the gradual inspissation of a decoction of 
scarabs, much favored by Mior Lumivix in the com 
pounding of his most requested love-potions. He had 
warned me often that this liquor must be thickened nei 
ther too slowly nor too rapidly, by maintaining an even 
fire in the athanor, and had cursed me more than once 
for spoiling it. Therefore, I did not yield to my drowsi 
ness till the decoction was safely decanted and strained 
thrice through Ike sieve of perforated sharkskin. 


Taciturn beyond his wont, the Master had retired early 
to his chamber. I knew that something troubled him; but 
was too tired for overmuch conjecture, and had not dared 
to question him. 

It seemed that I had not slept for more than the period 
of a few pulse-beats—and here was the Master thrusting 
the yellow-slotted eye of his lantern into my face and 
dragging me from the pallet I knew that I should not 
sleep again that night: for the Master wore his one- 
horned hat, and his cloak was girdled tightly about him, 
with the ancient arthame depending from the girdle in its 
shagreen sheath that time and the hands of many magi 
cians had blackened. 

“Abortion fathered by a sloth!” he cried. “Suckling of 
a sow that has eaten mandragora! Would you slumber till 
doomsday? We must hurry: I have learned that Sarcand 
has procured the chart of Omvor and has gone forth 
alone to the wharves. No doubt he means to embark in 
quest of the temple-treasure. We must follow quickly for 
much time has already been lost.” 

I rose now without further demur and dressed myself 
expeditiously, knowing well the urgency of this matter. 
Sarcand, who had but lately come to the city of Miro- 
uane, had already made himself the most formidable of 
all my master’s competitors. It was said that he was na 
tive to Naat, amid the sombre western ocean, having been 
begotten by a sorcerer of that isle on a woman of the 
black cannibals who dwell beyond its middle mountains. 
He combined his mother’s savage nature with the dark 
necromantic craft of his father; and, moreover, had ac 
quired much dubious knowledge and repute in his travels 
through orient kingdoms before settling in Mirouane. 

The fabulous chart of Omvor, dating from lost ages, 
was a thing that many generations of wizards had dreamt 
to find. Omvor, an ancient pirate still renowned, had per 
formed successfully a feat of impious rashness. Sailing up 
a closely guarded estuary by night with his small crew 
disguised as priests in stolen temple-barges, he had looted 
the fane of the Moon-God in Faraad and had carried 
away many of its virgins, together with gems, gold, altar- 


vessels, talismans, phylacteries and books of eldritch elder 
magic. These books were the gravest loss of all, since 
even the priests had never dared to copy them. They were 
unique and irreplaceable, containing the erudition of bur 
ied aeons. 

Omvor’s feat had given rise to many legends. He and 
his crew and the ravished virgins, in two small brigan 
tines, had vanished ultimately amid the western seas. It 
was believed that they had been caught by the Black 
River, that terrible ocean-stream which pours with an ir 
resistible swiftening beyond Naat to the world’s end. But 
before that final voyage, Omvor had lightened his vessels 
of the looted treasure and had made a chart on which the 
location of its hiding-place was indicated. This chart he 
had given to a former comrade who had grown too old 
for voyaging. 

No man had ever found the treasure. But it was said 
that the chart still existed throughout the centuries, hid 
den somewhere no less securely than the loot of the 
Moon-God’s temple. Of late there were rumors that some 
sailor, inheriting it from his father, had brought the map 
to Mirouane. Mior Lumivix, through agents both human 
and preterhuman, had tried vainly to trace the sailor; 
knowing that Sarcand and the other wizards of the city 
were also seeking him. 

This much was known to me; and the Master told me 
more while, at his bidding, I collected hastily such provi 
sions as we needed for a voyage of several days. 

“I had watched Sarcand like an osprey watching its 
nest,” he said. “My familiars told me that he had found 
the chart’s owner, and had hired some thief to steal it; 
but they could tell me little else. Even the eyes of my 
devil-cat, peering through his windows, were baffled by 
the cuttle-fish darkness with which his magic surrounds 
him at will. - 

“Tonight I did a dangerous thing, since there was no 
other way. Drinking the juice of the purple dedcdm, 
which induces profound trance, I projected my ka into his 
elemental-guarded chamber. The elementals knew my 
presence, they gathered about me in shapes of fire and 


shadow, menacing me unspeakably. They opposed me, 
they drove me forth . . . but I had seen—enough.” 

The Master paused, bidding me gird myself with a con 
secrated magic sword, similar to his own but of less antiq 
uity, which he had never before allowed me to wear. By 
this time I had gathered together the required provision 
of food and drink, storing it in a strong fish-net that I 
could carry easily over my shoulder by the handle. The 
net was one that was used mainly for catching certain 
sea-reptiles, from which Mior Lumivix extracted a venom 
possessing unique virtue. 

It was not till we had locked all the portals, and had 
plunged into the dark seaward-winding streets, that the 
Master resumed his account: 

“A man was leaving Sarcand’s chamber at the moment 
of my entrance. I saw him briefly, ere the black arras 
parted and closed; but I shall know him again. He was 
young and plump, with powerful sinews under the plump 
ness, with slanted squinting eyes in a girlish face and the 
swart yellow skin of a man from the southern isles. He 
wore the short breeks and ankle-topping boots of a mari 
ner, being otherwise naked. 

“Sarcand was sitting with his back half-turned, holding 
an unrolled sheet of papyrus, yellow as the sailor’s face, 
to that evil, four-homed lamp which he feeds with cobras’ 
oil. The lamp glared like a £houl’s eye. But I looked over 
his shoulder . . . long enough . . . before his demons 
could hurry me from the room. The papyrus was indeed 
the chart of Omvor. It was stiff with age, and stained with 
blood and sea-water. But its title and purpose and appel 
lations were still legible, though inscribed in an archaic 
script that few can read nowadays. 

“It showed the western shore of the continent Zo- 
thique, and the seas beyond. An isle lying due westward 
from Mirouane was indicated as the burial-place of the 
treasure. It was named the Island of Crabs on the chart: 
but plainly it is none other than the one now called Iribos 
which, though seldom visited, lies at a distance of only 
two days’ voyaging. There are no other islands within a 


hundred leagues, either north or south, excepting a few 
desolate rocks and small atolls.” 

Urging me to greater haste, Mior Lumivix continued: 

“I woke too tardily from the swoon induced by the de- 
daim. A lesser adept would never have awakened at all. 

“My familiars wafned me that Sarcand had left his 
house a full hour ago. He was prepared for a journey, 
and went wharfward. But we will overtake him. I think 
that he will go without companions to Iribos, desiring to 
keep the treasure wholly secret. He is indeed strong and 
terrible, but his demons are of a kind that cannot cross 
water, being entirely earthbound. He has left them behind 
with moiety of his magic. Have no fear for the outcome.” 

The wharves were still and almost deserted, except for 
a few sleeping sailors who had succumbed to the rank 
wine and arrack of the taverns. Under the late moon, that 
had curved and sharpened to a slim scimitar, we un 
moored our boat and pushed away, the Master holding 
the tiller, while I bent my shoulders to the broad-bladed 
oars. Thus we threaded the huddled maze of far-gathered 
ships, of xebecs and galleys, of river-barges and scows 
and feluccas, that thronged that immemorial harbor. The 
sluggish air, hardly stirring our tall lateen sail, was preg 
nant with sea-smells, with the reek of laden fishing boats 
and the spices of exotic cargoes. None hailed us; we 
heard only the calling of watchmen on shadowy decks, 
proclaiming the hour in outlandish tongues. 

Our boat, though small and open, was stoutly built of 
orient beefwood. Sharply prowed and deeply keeled, with 
high bulwarks, it had proven itself seaworthy even in tem 
pests such as were not to be apprehended at this season. 

Blowing over Mirouane, from fields and orchards and 
desert kingdoms, a wind freshened behind us as we 
cleared the harbor. It stiffened, till the sail bellied like a 
dragon’s wing. The furrows of foam curved high beside 
our sharp prow, as we followed Capricomus down the 
west. 

Far out on the waters before us, in the dim moonlight, 
something seemed to move, to dance and waver like a 


phantom. Perhaps it was Sarcand’s boat ... or anoth 
er’s. Doubtless, the Master also saw it; but he said only: 

“You may sleep now.” 

So I, Manthar the apprentice, composed myself to 
slumber, while Mior Lumivix steered on, and the starry 
hooves and horns of the Goat sank seaward. 

The sun was high above our stem when I awakened. 
The wind still blew, strong and favorable, driving us into 
the west with unabated speed. We had passed beyond 
sight of the shore line of . The sky was void of 
clouds, the sea vacant of any sail, unrolling before us like 
a vast scroll of sombre azure, lined only with the shifting 
and fading foam-crests. 

The day went by, ebbing beyond the still-empty hori 
zon; and night overtook us like the heaven-blotting purple 
sail of a god, sewn with the Signs and planets. The night 
too went over, and a second dawn. 

All this time, without sleeping, the Master had steered 
the boat, with eyes peering implacably westward like 
those of an ocean-hawk; and I wondered greatly at his 
endurance. Now for awhile he slept, sitting upright at the 
helm. But it seemed that his eyes were still vigilant be 
hind their lids; and his hand still held the rudder straight, 
without slackening. 

In a few hours the Master opened his eyes; but hardly 
stirred from the posture he maintained throughout. 

He had spoken little during our voyage. I did not ques 
tion him, knowing that he would tell me whatever was 
needful at the due time. But I was full of curiosities; and 
was not without fear and doubt regarding Sarcand, whose 
rumored necromancies might well have dismayed others 
than a mere novice. I could surmise nothing of the Mas 
ter’s thoughts, except that they concerned dark and eso 
teric matters. 

Having slept for the third time since our embarkment, 
I was roused by the Master crying loudly. In the dimness 
of the third dawn, an island towered before us, impending 
with jagged cliffs and jutting crags, and barring the sea 
for several leagues to northward and southward. It was 
shaped somewhat like a monster, facing north. Its head 


was a high-homed promontory, dipping a great griffin- 
like beak in the ocean. 

“This is Iribos,” the Master told me. “The sea is strong 
about it, with strange tides and perilous currents. There 
are no landing places on this side, and we must not ven 
ture too close. We must round the northern headland. 
There is a small cove amid the western cliffs, entered only 
through a sea-cavem. It is there that the treasure lies.” 

We tacked northward slowly and deviously against the 
wind, at a distance of three or four bow-shots from the 
island. All our seacraft was required to make progress: 
for the wind strengthened wildly, as if swollen by the 
breath of devils. Above its howling we heard the surfs 
clamor upon those monstrous rocks that rose bare and 
gaunt from cerements of foam. 

“The isle is unpeopled,” said Mior Lumivix. “It is 
shunned by sailors and even by the sea-fowl. Men say 
that the curse of the maritime gods was laid upon it long 
ago, forbidding it to any but the creatures of the subma 
rine deep. Its coves and caverns are haunted by crabs and 
octopi. . . and perhaps by stranger things.” 

We sailed on in a tedious serpentine course, beaten 
back at times or borne perilously shoreward by the shift 
ing gusts that opposed us like evil demons. The sun 
climbed in the orient, shining starkly down on the desola 
tion of crags and scarps that was Iribos. Still we tacked 
and veered; and I seemed to sense the beginning of a 
strange unease in the Master. But of this, if such there 
was, his manner betrayed no sign. 

It was almost noon when we rounded at last the long 
beak of the northern promontory. There, when we turned 
southerly, the wind fell in a weird stillness, and the sea 
was miraculously calmed as if by wizard oils. Our sail 
hung limp and useless above mirror-like waters, in which 
it seemed that the boat’s reflected image and ours, unbro 
ken, moveless, might float forever amid the unchanging 
reflection of the monster-shapen isle. We both began to 
ply the oars; but even thus the boat crawled with a singu 
lar slowness. 

I observed the isle strictly as we passed along, noting 


several inlets where, to all appearance, a vessel could 
have landed readily. 

"‘There is much danger here,” said Mior Lumivix, 
without elucidating his statement. 

Again, as we continued, the cliffs became a wall that 
was broken only by rifts and chasms. They were crowned 
in places by a sparse, funereal-colored vegetation that 
hardly served to soften their formidable aspect. High up 
in the clefted rocks, where it seemed that no natural tide 
or tempest could have flung them, I observed the scat 
tered spars and timbers of antique vessels. 

“Row closer,” enjoined the Master. “We are nearing 
the cavern that leads to the hidden inlet.” 

Even as we veered landward through the crystalline 
calm, there was a sudden seething and riffling about us, 
as if some monster had risen beneath. The boat began to 
shoot with plummet-like speed toward the cliffs, the sea 
foaming and streaming all around as though some kraken 
were dragging us to its cavemed lair. Borne like a leaf on 
a cataract, we toiled vainly with straining oars against the 
ineluctable current. 

Heaving higher momentarily, the cliffs seemed to shear 
the heavens above us, unscalable, without ledge or foot 
hold. Then, in the sheer wall, appeared the low, broad 
arch of a cavern-mouth that we had not discerned hereto 
fore, toward which the boat was drawn with dreadful 
swiftness. 

“It is the entrance!” cried Master. “But some wizard 
tide has flooded it.” 

We shipped our useless oars and crouched down be 
hind the thwarts as we neared the opening: for it seemed 
that the lowness of the arch would afford bare passage to 
our high-built prow. There was no time to unstep the 
mast, which broke instantly like a reed as we raced on 
without slackening into blind torrential darkness. 

Half-stunned, and striving to extricate myself from the 
fallen, spar-weighted sail, I felt the chillness of water 
splashing about me and knew that the boat was filling and 
sinking. A moment more, and the water was in my ears 
and eyes and nostrils: but even as I sank and drowned 

there was still the sense of swift onward motion. Then it 
seemed dimly that arms were around me in the strangling 
darkness; and I rose suddenly, choking and gasping and 
spewing, into sunlight. 

When I had rid my lungs of the brine and regained my 
senses more fully, I found that Mior Lumivix and I were 
floating in a small haven, shaped like a half-moon, and 
surrounded by crags and pinnacles of sullen-colored rock. 
Close by, in a sheer, straight wall, was the inner mouth of 
the cavern through which the mysterious current had car 
ried us, with faint ripples spreading around it and fading 
away into water smooth and green as a platter of jade. 
Opposite, on the haven’s farther side, was the long curve 
of a shelving beach strewn with boulders and driftwood. 
A boat resembling ours, with an unshipped mast and a 
furled sail the color of fresh blood, was moored to the 
beach. Near it, from the shoaling water, protruded the 
broken-off mast of another boat, whose sunken outlines 
we discerned obscurely. Two objects which we took for 
human figures were lying half in and half out of the shal 
lows a little farther along the strand. At that distance we 
could hardly know whether they were living men or ca 
davers. Their contours were half-hidden by what seemed 
a curious sort of brownish-yellow drapery that trailed 
away amid the rocks, appearing to move and shift and 
waver incessantly. 

“There is mystery here,” said Mior Lumivix in a low 
voice. “We must proceed with care and circumspection.” 

We swam ashore at the near end of the beach, where it 
narrowed like the tip of a crescent moon to meet the sea 
wall. Taking his arthame from its sheath the Master 
wiped it dry with the hem of his cloak, bidding me do 
likewise with my own weapons lest the brine corrode it. 
Then, hiding the wizard blades beneath our raiment, we 
followed the broadening beach toward the moored boat 
and the two reclining figures. 

“This is indeed the place of Omvor’s chart,” observed 
the Master. “The boat with the blood-red sail belongs to 
Sarcand. No doubt he has found the cave, which lies hid- 


den somewhere among the rocks. But who are these oth 
ers? I do not think that they came with Sarcand.” 

As we neared the figures, the appearance of a yellow 
ish-brown drapery that covered them resolved itself in its 
true nature. It consisted of a great number of crabs who 
were crawling over their half-submerged bodies and run 
ning to and fro behind a heap of immense boulders. 

We went forward and stooped over the bodies, from 
which the crabs were busily detaching morsels of bloody 
flesh. One of the bodies lay on its face; the other stared 
with half-eaten features at the sun. Their skin, or what 
remained of it, was a swarthy yellow. Both were clad in 
short purple breeks and sailor’s boots, being otherwise 
naked. 

“What hellishness is this?” inquired the Master. “These 
men are but newly dead—and already the crabs rend 
them. Such creatures are wont to wait for the softening of 
decomposition. And look—they do not even devour the 
morsels they have tom, but bear them away.” 

This indeed was true, for I saw now that a constant 
procession of crabs departed from the bodies, each car 
rying a shred of flesh, to vanish beyond the rocks; while 
another procession came, or perhaps returned, with 
empty pincers. 

“I think,” said Mior Lumivix, “that the man with the 
upturned face is the sailor that I saw leaving Sarcand’s 
room; the thief who had stolen the chart for Sarcand 
from its owner.” 

In my horror and disgust I had picked up a fragment 
of rock and was about to crush some of the hideously 
laden crabs as they crawled away from the corpses. 

“Nay,” the Master stayed me, “let us follow them.” 

Rounding the great heap of boulders, we saw that the 
twofold procession entered, and emerged from, the mouth 
of a cavern that had heretofore been hidden from view. 

With hands tightening on the hilts of our arthames, we 
went cautiously and circumspectly toward the cavern and 
paused a little short of its entrance. From this vantage, 
however, nothing was visible within except the lines of 
crawling crabs. 


“Enter!” cried a sonorous voice that seemed to prolong 
and repeat the word in far-receding reverberations, like 
the voice of a ghoul echoing in some profound sepulchral 
vault 

The voice was that of the sorcerer Sarcand. The Mas 
ter looked at me, with whole volumes of warning in his 
narrowed eyes and we entered the cavern. 

The place was high-domed and of indeterminable ex 
tent. Light was afforded by a great rift in the vault above, 
through which, at this hour, the direct rays of the sun 
slanted in, falling goldenly on the cavern’s foreground 
and tipping with light the great fangs of stalactites and 
stalagmites in the gloom beyond. At one side was a pool 
of water, fed by a thin rill from a spring that dripped 
somewhere in the darkness. 

With the shafted splendor shining full upon him, Sar 
cand reposed half-sitting, half-recumbent, with his back 
against an open chest of age-darkened bronze. His huge 
ebon-black body, powerfully muscled though inclining to 
ward corpulence, was nude except for a necklace of ru 
bies, each the size of a plover’s egg, that depended about 
his throat. His crimson sarong, strangely tattered, bared 
his legs as they lay outstretched amid the cavern’s rubble. 
The right leg had manifestly been broken somewhere 
below the knee, for it was rudely bound with splints of 
driftwood and strips tom from the sarong. 

Sarcand’s cloak of lazuli-colored silk was outspread be 
side him. It was strewn with graven gems and amulets, 
with gold coins and jewel-crusted altar-vessels, that 
flashed and glittered amid volumens of parchments and 
papyrus. A book with black metal covers lay open as if 
newly put aside, showing illuminations drawn in fiery an 
cient inks. 

Beside the book, within reach of Sarcand’s fingers, was 
a mound of raw and bloody shreds. Over the cloak, over 
the coins and scrolls and jewels, crawled the incoming 
lines of crabs, each of which added its tom-off morsel to 
the mound and then crept on to join the outgoing col 
umn. 

I could well believe the tales regarding Sarcand’s an- 


cestry. Indeed, it seemed that he favored his mother en 
tirely: for his hair and features as well as his skin were 
those of the Negro cannibals of Naat as I had seen them 
depicted in travelers’ drawings. He fronted us inscrutably, 
his arms crossed on his bosom. I noticed a great emerald 
shining darkly on the index finger of his right hand. 

“I knew that you would follow me,” he said, "‘even as I 
knew that the thief and his companion would follow. All 
of you have thought to slay me and take the treasure. It 
is true that I have suffered an injury: a fragment of loos 
ened rock fell from the cavern-roof, breaking my leg as I 
bent over to inspect the treasures in the opened chest. I 
must lie here till the bone has knit. In the meanwhile I 
am well armed . . . and well served and guarded.” 

“We came to take the treasure,” replied Mior Lumivix 
directly. “I had thought to slay you, but only in fair com 
bat, man to man and wizard to wizard, with none but my 
neophyte Manthar and the rocks of Iribos for witness.” 

“Aye, and your neophyte is also armed with an ar- 
thame. However, it matters little. I shall feast on your 
liver, Mior Lumivix, and wax stronger by such power of 
sorcery as was yours.” 

This the Master appeared to disregard. 

“What foulness have you conjured now?” he inquired 
sharply, pointing to the crabs who were still depositing 
their morsels on the grisly mound. 

Sarcand held aloft die hand on whose index finger 
gleamed the immense emerald, set, as we now perceived, 
in a ring that was wrought with the tentacles of a kraken 
clasping the orblike gem. 

“I found this ring amid the treasure,” he boasted. “It 
was closed in a cylinder of unknown metal, together with 
a scroll that informed me of the ring’s uses and its mighty 
magic. It is the signet-ring of Basatan, the sea-god. He 
who looks long and deeply into the emerald may behold 
distant scenes and happenings at will. He who wears the 
ring can exert control over the winds and currents of the 
sea and over the sea’s creatures, by describing certain 
signs in air with his finger.” 

While Sarcand spoke it seemed that the green jewel 


brightened and darkened and deepened strangely, like a 
tiny window with all the sea’s mystery and immensity 
lying beyond. Enthralled and entranced, I forgot the cir 
cumstances of our situation: for the jewel swelled upon 
my vision, blotting from view the black fingers of Sar- 
cand, with a swirling as of tides and of shadowy fins and 
tentacles far down in its glimm ering greenness. 

“Beware, Manthar,” the Master murmured in my ear. 
“We face a dreadful magic, and must retain the co mm and 
of all our faculties. Avert your eyes from the emerald.” 

I obeyed the dimly heard whisper. The vision dwindled 
away, vanishing swiftly, and the form and features of Sar- 
cand returned. His lubber lips were curved in a broad 
sardonic grin, showing his strong white teeth that were 
pointed like those of a shark. He dropped the huge hand 
that wore the signet of Basatan, plun ging it into the chest 
behind him and bringing it forth filled with many-tinted 
gems, with pearls, opals, sapphires, bloodstones, dia 
monds, chatoyants. These he let dribble in a flashing rill 
from his fingers, as he resumed his peroration: 

“I preceded you to Iribos by many hours. It was 
known to me that the outer cavern could be entered 
safely only at low tide, with an unstepped mast 

“Perhaps you have already inferred whatever else I 
might tell you. At any rate the knowledge will perish with 
you very shortly. 

“After learning the uses of the ring I was able to watch 
the seas around Iribos in the jewel. Lying here with my 
shattered leg, I saw the approach of the thief and his fel 
low. I called up the sea-current by which their boat 
was drawn into the flooded cavern, sinking swiftly. They 
would have swum ashore: but at my command the crabs 
in the haven drew them under and drowned them; letting 
the tide beach their corpses later. . . . That cursed thief! 
I had paid him well for the stolen chart, which he was too 
ignorant to read, suspecting only that it concerned a 
treasure-trove. . . . 

“Still later I trapped you in the same fashion, after delaying you awhile with contrary winds and an adverse 


calm. I have preserved you, however, for another doom 
than drowning.” 

The voice of the necromancer sank away in profound 
echoes, leaving a silence fraught with insufferable sus 
pense. It seemed that we stood amid the gaping of undis 
covered gulfs, in a place of awful darkness, lit only by the 
eyes of Sarcand and the ring’s talismanic jewel. 

The spell that had fallen upon me was broken by the 
cold ironic tones of the Master: 

“Sarcand, there is another sorcery that you have not 
mentioned.” 

Sarcand’s laughter was like the sound of a mounting 
surf. “I follow the custom of my mother’s people; and the 
crabs serve me with that which I require, summoned and 
constrained by the sea-god’s ring.” 

So saying, he raised his hand and described a peculiar 
sign with the index finger, on which the ring flashed like a 
circling orb. The double column of crabs suspended their 
crawling for a moment. Then, moved as if by a single im 
pulse, they began to scuttle toward us, while others ap 
peared from the cavern’s entrance and from its inner recesses 
to swell their rapidly growing numbers. They 
surged upon us with a speed beyond belief, assailing our 
ankles and shins with their knife-sharp pincers as if ani 
mated by demons. I stooped over, striking and thrusting 
with my arthame; but the few that I crushed in this man 
ner were replaced by scores; while others, catching the 
hem of my cloak, began to climb it from behind and 
weigh it down. Thus encumbered, I lost my footing on 
the slippery ground and fell backward amid the scuttling 
multitude. 

Lying there while the crabs poured over me like a 
seething wave, I saw the Master shed his burdened cloak 
and cast it aside. Then, while the spell-drawn army still 
besieged him, climbing upon each other’s backs, and scal 
ing his very knees and thighs, he hurled his arthame with 
a strange circular motion at the upraised arm of Sarcand. 
Straightly the blade flew, revolving like a disk of bright 
ness; and the hand of the black necromancer was sun- 


dered cleanly at the wrist, and the ring flashed on its 
index finger like a falling star as it fell groundward. 

Blood spouted in a fountain from the handless wrist, 
while Sarcand sat as in a stupor, maintaining for a brief 
instant the gesture of his conjuration. Then his arm 
dropped to his side and the blood rilled out upon the littered 
cloak, spreading swiftly amid the gems and coins 
and volumens, and staining the mound of crab-deposited 
morsels. As if the arm’s movement had been another sig 
nal, the crabs fell away from the Master and myself and 
swarmed in a long, innumerable tide toward Sarcand. 
They covered his legs, they climbed his great torso, they 
scrambled for place on his escaladed shoulders. He tore 
them away with his one hand, roaring terrible curses and 
imprecations that rolled in countless echoes throughout 
the cavern. But the crabs still assailed him as if driven by 
some demoniac frenzy; and blood trickled forth more and 
more copiously from the small wounds they had made, to 
suffuse their pincers and streak their shells with broaden 
ing rillets of crimson. 

It seemed that long hours went by while the Master 
and I stood watching. At last the prostrate thing that was 
Sarcand had ceased to heave and toss under the living 
shroud that enswathed it. Only the splint-bound leg and 
the lopped-off hand with the ring of Basatan remained 
untouched by the loathsomely busied crabs. 

“Faugh!” the Master exclaimed. “He left his devils be 
hind when he came here; but he found others. ... It is 
time that we went out for a walk in the sun. Manthar, my 
good lubberly apprentice, I would have you build a fire of 
driftwood on the beach. Pile on the fuel without sparing, 
to make a bed of coals deep and hot and red as the 
hearth of hell, in which to roast us a dozen crabs. But be 
careful to choose the ones that have come freshly from 
the sea.” 

The Death of Ilalotha 


Black Lord of bale and fear, master of all confusion! 

By thee , thy prophet saith, 

New power is given to wizards after death , 

And witches in corruption draw forbidden breath 
And weave such wild enchantment and illusion 
As none but lamiae may use; 

And through thy grace the charneled corpses lose 
Their horror , and nefandous loves are lighted 
In noisome vaults long nighted; 

And vampires make their sacrifice to thee — 

Disgorging blood as if great urns had poured 

Their bright vermilion hoard 

About the washed and weltering sarcophagi . 

—Ludafs Litany to Thasaidon . 

According to the custom in old Tasuun, the obsequies 
of Ilalotha, lady-in-waiting to the self-widowed Queen 
Xantlicha, had formed an occasion of much merrymaking 
and prolonged festivity. For three days, on a bier of di 
verse-colored silks from the Orient, under a rose-hued 
canopy that might well have domed some nuptial couch, 
she had lain clad with gala garments amid the great feast 
ing hall of the royal palace in Miraab. About her, from 
morning dusk to sunset, from cool even to torridly glaring 
dawn, the feverish tide of the funeral orgies had surged 
and eddied without slackening. Nobles, court officials, 
guardsmen, scullions, astrologers, eunuchs, and all the 
high ladies, waiting women and female slaves of Xantli 
cha had taken part in that prodigal debauchery which was 
believed to honor most fitly the deceased. Mad songs and 
obscene ditties were sung, and dancers whirled in vertigi 
nous frenzy to the lascivious pleading of untirable lutes. 
Wines and liquors were poured torrentially from mon 
strous amphoras; the tables fumed with spicy meats piled 


in huge hummocks and forever replenished. The drinkers 
offered libation to Halotha, till the fabrics of her bier 
were stained to darker hues by the spilt vintages. On all 
sides around her, in attitudes of disorder or prone aban 
donment, lay those who had yielded to amorous licence 
or the fullness of their potations. With half-shut eyes and 
lips slightly parted, in the rosy shadow cast by the cata 
falque, she bore no aspect of death but seemed a sleeping 
empress who ruled impartially over the living and the 
dead. This appearance, together with a strange heighten 
ing of her natural beauty, was remarked by many: and 
some said that she seemed to await a lover’s kiss rather 
than the kisses of the worm. 

On the third evening, when the many-tongued brazen 
lamps were lit and the rites drew to their end, there returned 
to court the Lord Thulos, acknowledged lover of 
Queen Xantlicha, who had gone a week previous to visit 
his domain on the western border and had heard nothing 
of Dalotha’s death. Still unaware, he came into the hall at 
that hour when the. saturnalia began to flag and the fallen 
revelers to outnumber those who still moved and drank 
and made riot. 

He viewed the disordered hall with little surprise, for 
such scenes were f amili ar to him from childhood. Then, 
approaching the bier, he recognized its occupant with a 
certain startlement. Among the numerous ladies of Mi- 
raab who had drawn his libertine affections, Halotha had 
held sway longer than most; and, it was said, she had 
grieved more passionately over his defection than any 
other. She had been superseded a month before by Xan 
tlicha, who had shown favor to Thulos in no ambiguous 
manner; and Thulos, perhaps, had abandoned her not 
without regret: for the role of lover to the queen, though 
advantageous and not wholly disagreeable, was somewhat 
precarious. Xantlicha, it was universally believed, had rid 
herself of the late King Archain by means of a tomb-dis 
covered vial of poison that owed its peculiar subtlety and 
virulence to the art of ancient sorcerers. Following this 
act of disposal, she had taken many lovers, and those 
who failed to please her came invariably to ends no less 


violent than that of Archain. She was exigent, exorbitant, 
demanding a strict fidelity somewhat irksome to Thulos; 
who, pleading urgent affairs on his remote estate, had 
been glad enough of a week away from court 

Now, as he stood beside the dead woman, Thulos for 
got the queen and bethought him of certain summer 
nights that had been honeyed by the fragrance of jasmine 
and the jasmine-white beauty of Dalotha. Even less than 
the others could he believe her dead: for her present as 
pect differed in no wise from that which she had often as 
sumed during their old intercourse. To please his whim, 
she had feigned the inertness and complaisance of slum 
ber or death; and at such times he had loved her with an 
ardor undismayed by the pantherine vehemence with 
which, at other whiles, she was wont to reciprocate or in 
vite h is caresses. 

Moment by moment, as if through the working of some 
powerful necromancy, there grew upon him a curious hal 
lucination, and it seemed that he was again the lover of 
those lost nights, and had entered that bower in the pal 
ace gardens where Ilalotha waited him on a couch strewn 
with overblown petals, lying with bosom quiet as her face 
and hands. No longer was he aware of the crowded hall: 
the high-flaring lights, the wine-flushed faces had become 
a moon-bright parterre of drowsily nodding blossoms, 
and the voices of the courtiers were no more than a faint 
suspiration of wind amid cypress and jasmine. The warm, 
aphrodisiac perfumes of the June night welled about him; 
and again, as of old, it seemed that they arose from 
the person of Dalotha no less than from the flowers. 
Prompted by intense desire, he stooped over and felt her 
cool arm stir involuntarily beneath his kiss. 

Then, with the bewilderment of a sleepwalker awak 
ened rudely, he heard a voice that hissed in his ear with 
soft venom: “Hast forgotten thyself, my Lord Thulos? In 
deed, I wonder little, for many of my bawcocks deem that 
she is fairer in death than in life.” And, turning from Da 
lotha, while the weird spell dissolved from his senses, he 
found Xantlicha at his side. Her garments were disar 
rayed, her hair was unbound and disheveled, and she 


reeled slightly, clutching him by the shoulder with sharp- 
nailed fingers. Her full, poppy-crimson lips were curled 
by a vixenish fury, and in her long-lidded yellow eyes 
there blazed the jealousy of an amorous cat. 

Thulos, overwhelmed by a strange confusion, remem 
bered but partially the enchantment to which he had suc 
cumbed; and he was unsure whether or not he had ac 
tually kissed Ilalotha and had felt her flesh quiver to his 
mouth. Verily, he thought, this thing could not have been, 
and a waking dream had momentarily seized him. But he 
was troubled by the words of Xantlicha and her anger, 
and by the half-furtive drunken laughters and ribald whis 
pers that he heard passing among the people about the 
hall. 

“Beware, my Thulos,” the queen murmured, her 
strange anger seeming to subside; “for men say that she 
was a witch . . .” 

“How did she die?” queried Thulos. 

“From no other fever than that of love, it is rumored.” 

“Then, surely, she was no witch,” Thulos argued with 
a lightness that was far from his thoughts and feelings; 
“for true sorcery should have found the cure.” 

“It was from love of thee,” said Xantlicha darkly; 
“and, as all women know, thy heart is blacker and harder 
than black adamant. No witchcraft, however potent, 
could prevail thereon.” Her mood, as she spoke, ap 
peared to soften suddenly. “Thy absence has been over- 
long, my lord. Come to me at midnight: I will wait for 
thee in the south pavilion.” Then, eyeing him sultrily for 
an instant from under drooped lids, and pinching his arm 
in such manner that her nails pierced through cloth and 
skin like a cat’s talons, she turned from Thulos to hail 
certain of the harem eunuchs. 

Thulos, when the queen’s attention was disengaged 
from him, ventured to look again at Ilalotha; pondering, 
meanwhile, the curious remarks of Xantlicha. He knew 
that Ilalotha, like many of the court ladies, had dabbled 
in spells and philters; but her witchcraft had never con 
cerned him, since he felt no interest in other charms or 
enchantments than those with which nature had endowed 


the bodies of women. And it was quite impossible for him 
to believe that Ilalotha had died from a fatal passion: 
since, in his experience, passion was never fatal. 

Indeed, as he regarded her with confused emotions, he 
was again beset by the impression that she had not died 
at all. There was no repetition of the weird, half-remem 
bered hallucination of other time and place; but it seemed 
to him that she had stirred from her former position on 
the wine-stained bier, turning her face toward him a little, 
as a woman turns to an expected lover; that the arm he 
had kissed (either in dream or reality) was outstretched 
a little farther from her side. 

Thulos bent nearer, fascinated by the mystery and 
drawn by a stranger attraction that he could not have 
named. Again, surely, he had dreamt or had been mis 
taken. But even as the doubt grew, it seemed that the 
bosom of Ilalotha stirred in faint respiration and he heard 
an almost inaudible but thrilling whisper: ‘‘Come to me 
at midnight. I will wait for thee ... in the tomb.” 

At this instant there appeared beside the catafalque 
certain people in the sober and rusty raiment of sextons, 
who had entered the hall silently, unperceived by Thulos 
or by any of the company. They carried among them a 
thin-walled sarcophagus of newly welded and burnished 
bronze. It was their office to remove the dead woman and 
bear her to the sepulchral vaults of her family, which 
were situated in the old necropolis lying somewhat to 
northward of the palace gardens. 

Thulos would have cried out to restrain them from 
their purpose; but his tongue clove tightly; nor could he 
move any of his members. Not knowing whether he slept 
or woke, he watched the people of the cemetery as they 
placed Ilalotha in the sarcophagus and bore her quickly 
from the hall, unfollowed and still unheeded by the 
drowsy bachanalians. Only when the somber cortege had 
departed was he able to stir from his position by the 
empty bier. His thoughts were sluggish, and full of dark 
ness and indecision. Smitten by an immense fatigue that 
was not unnatural after his daylong journey, he withdrew 


to his apartments and fell instantly into death-deep slum 
ber. 

Freeing itself gradually from the cypress-bougjis, as if 
from the long, stretched fingers of witches, a waning and 
misshapen moon glared horizontally through the eastern 
window when Thulos awoke. By this token, he knew that 
the hour drew toward midnight, and recalled the assigna 
tion which Queen Xantlicha had made with him: an as 
signation which he could hardly break without incurring 
the queen’s deadly displeasure. Also, with singular clear 
ness, he recalled another rendezvous ... at the same 
time but in a different place. Those incidents and impres 
sions of Halotha’s funeral, which, at the time, had seemed 
so dubitable and dreamlike, returned to him with a pro 
found conviction of reality, as if etched on his mind by 
some mordant chemistry of sleep ... or the strengthen 
ing of some sorcerous charm. He felt that Halotha had in 
deed stirred on her bier and spoken to him; that the sex 
tons had borne her still living to the tomb. Perhaps her 
supposed demise had been merely a sort of catalepsy; or 
else she had deliberately feigned death in a last effort to 
revive his passion. These thoughts awoke within him a 
raging fever of curiosity and desire; and he saw before 
him her pale, inert, luxurious beauty, presented as if by 
enchantment 

Direly distraught, he went down by the lampless stairs 
and hallways to the moonlit labyrinth of the gardens. He 
cursed the untimely exigence of Xantlicha. However, as 
he told himself, it was more than likely that the queen, 
continuing to imbibe the liquors of Tasuun, had long 
since reached a condition in which she would neither 
keep nor recall her appointment. This thought reassured 
him: in his queerly bemused mind, it soon became a cer 
tainty; and he did not hasten toward the south pavilion 
but strolled vaguely amid the wan and somber boscage. 

More and more it seemed unlikely that any but himself 
was abroad: for the long, unlit wings of the palace 
sprawled as in vacant stupor; and in the gardens there 
were only dead shadows, and pools of still fragrance in 


which the winds had drowned. And over all, like a pale, 
monstrous poppy, the moon distilled her death-white 
slumber. 

Thulos, no longer mindful of his rendezvous with Xan- 
tlicha, yielded without further reluctation to the urgence 
that drove him toward another goal. Truly, it was no less 
than obligatory that he should visit the vaults and learn 
whether or not he had been deceived in his belief con 
cerning Ilalotha. Perhaps, if he did not go, she would 
stifle in the shut sarcophagus, and her pretended death 
would quickly become an actuality. Again, as if spoken in 
the moonlight before him, he heard the words she had 
whispered, or seemed to whisper, from the bier: “Come 
to me at midnight ... I will wait for thee ... in the 
tomb.” 

With the quickening steps and pulses of one who fares 
to the warm, petal-sweet couch of an adored mistress, he 
left the palace grounds by an unguarded northern postern 
and crossed the weedy common between the royal gardens 
and the old cemetery. Unchilled and undismayed, he 
entered those always-open portals of death, where ghoul 
headed monsters of black marble, glaring with hideously 
pitted eyes, maintained their charnel postures before the 
crumbling pylons. 

The very stillness of the low-bosomed graves, the rigor 
and pallor of the tall shafts, the deepness of bedded cy 
press shadows, the inviolacy of death by which all things 
were invested, served to heighten the singular excitement 
that had fired Thulos’ blood. It was as if he had drunk a 
philter spiced with mummia. All around him the mor 
tuary silence seemed to bum and quiver with a thousand 
memories of Ilalotha, together with those expectations to 
which he had given as yet no formal image . . . 

Once, with Ilalotha, he had visited the subterranean 
tomb of her ancestors; and, recalling its situation clearly, 
he came without indirection to the low-arched and ce 
dar-darkened entrance. Rank nettles and fetid fumitories, 
growing thickly about the seldom-used adit, were crushed 
down by the tread of those who had entered there before 
Thulos; and the rusty, iron-wrought door sagged heavily 


inward on its loose hinges. At his feet there lay an extin 
guished flambeau, dropped, no doubt, by one of the departing sextons. Seeing it, he realized that he had brought 
with him neither candle nor lanthom for the exploration 
of the vaults, and found in that providential torch an aus 
picious omen. 

Bearing the lit flambeau, he began his investigation. He 
gave no heed to the piled and dusty sarcophagi in the first 
reaches of the subterrane: for, during their past visit, Ila- 
lotha had shown to him a niche at the innermost extreme, 
where, in due time, she herself would find sepulture 
among the members of that decaying line. Strangely, in 
sidiously, like the breath of some vernal garden, the lan 
guid and luscious odor of jasmine swam to meet him 
through the musty air, amid the tiered presence of the 
dead; and it drew him to the sarcophagus that stood open 
between others tightly lidded. There he beheld Halotha, 
lying in the gay garments of her funeral, with half-shut 
eyes and half-parted lips; and upon her was the same 
weird and radiant beauty, the same voluptuous pallor and 
stillness, that had drawn Thulos with a necromantic 
charm. 

“I know that thou couldst come, O Thulos,” she mur 
mured, stirring a little, as if involuntarily, beneath the 
deepening ardor of his kisses that passed quickly from 
throat to bosom . . . 

The torch that had fallen from Thulos’ hand expired in 
the thick dust . . . 

Xantlicha, retiring to her chamber betimes, had slept 
illy. Perhaps she had drunk too much or too little of the 
dark, ardent vintages; perhaps her blood was fevered by 
the return of Thulos, and her jealousy still troubled by 
the hot kiss which he had laid on Halotha’s arm during 
the obsequies. A restlessness was upon her; and she rose 
well before the hour of her meeting with Thulos, and 
stood at her chamber window seeking such coolness as 
the night air might afford. 

The air, however, seemed heated as by the burning of 
hidden furnaces; her heart appeared to swell in her bosom 


and stifle her; and her unrest and agitation were increased 
rather than diminished by the spectacle of the moon-lulled 
gardens. She would have hurried forth to the tryst in the 
pavilion; but despite her impatience, she thought it well to 
keep Thulos waiting. Leaning thus from her sill, she beheld 
Thulos when he passed amid the parterres and arbors be 
low. She was struck by the unusual haste and intentness of 
his steps; and she wondered at their direction, which could 
bring him only to places remote from the rendezvous she 
had named. He disappeared from her sight in the cypress- 
lined alley that led to the north garden gate; and her 
wonderment was soon mingled with alarm and anger 
when he did not return. 

It was incomprehensible to Xantlicha that Thulos, or 
any man, would dare to forget the tryst in his normal 
senses; and seeking an explanation, she surmised that the 
working of some baleful and potent sorcery was probably 
involved. Nor, in the light of certain incidents that she 
had observed, and much else that had been rumored, was 
it hard for her to identify the sorceress. Ilalotha, the 
queen knew, had loved Thulos to the point of frenzy, and 
had grieved inconsolably after his desertion of her. People 
said that she had wrought various ineffectual spells to 
bring him back; that she had vainly invoked demons and 
sacrificed to them, and had made futile invultuations and 
death-charms against Xantlicha. In the end, she had died 
of sheer chagrin and despair, or perhaps had slain herself 
with some undetected poison . . . But, as was commonly 
believed in Tasuun, a witch dying thus, with unslaked desires and frustrate cantraips, could turn herself into a 
lamia or vampire and procure thereby the consummation 
of all her sorceries . . . 

The queen shuddered, remembering these things; and 
remembering also the hideous and malign transformation 
that was said to accompany the achievement of such 
ends: for those who used in rids manner the power of hell 
must take on the very character and the actual semblance 
of infernal beings. Too well she surmised the destination 
of Thulos, and the danger to which he had gone forth if 
her suspicions were true. And, knowing that she might 


face an equal danger, Xantlicha determined to follow 
him. 

She made little preparation, for there was no time to 
waste; but took from beneath her silken bed-cushions a 
small, straight-bladed dagger that she kept always within 
reach. The dagger had been anointed from point to hilt 
with such venom as was believed efficacious against either 
the living or the dead. Bearing it in her right hand, and 
carrying in the other a slot-eyed lanthom that she might 
require later, Xantlicha stole swiftly from the palace. 

The last lees of the evening’s wine ebbed wholly from 
her brain, and dim, ghastly fears awoke, warning her like 
the voices of ancestral phantoms. But, firm in her deter 
mination, she followed the path taken by Thulos; the path 
taken earlier by those sextons who had borne Halotha to 
her place of sepulture. Hovering from tree to tree, the 
moon accompanied her like a worm-hollowed visage. The 
soft, quick patter of her cothums, breaking the white si 
lence, seemed to tear the filmy cobweb pall that withheld, 
from her a world of spectral abominations. And more 
and more she recalled of those legendries that concerned 
such beings as Halotha; and her heart was shaken within 
her: for she knew that she would meet no mortal woman 
but a thing raised up and inspirited by the seventh hell. 
But amid the chill of these horrors, the thought of Thulos 
in the lamia’s arms was like a red brand that seared her 
bosom. 

Now the necropolis yawned before Xantlicha, and her 
path entered the cavernous gloom of far-vaulted funereal 
trees, as if passing into monstrous and shadowy mouths 
that were tusked with white monuments. The air grew 
dank and noisome, as if filled with the breathings of open 
crypts. Here the queen faltered, for it seemed that black, 
unseen cacodemons rose all about her from the graveyard 
ground, towering higher than the shafts and boles, and 
standing in readiness to assail her if she went farther. 
Nevertheless, she came anon to the dark adit that she 
sought. Tremulously she lit the wick of the slot-eyed lan 
thom; and, piercing the gross underground darkness be 
fore her with its bladed beam, she passed with ill-subdued 


terror and repugnance into that abode of the dead . . . 
and perchance of the Undead. 

However, as she followed the first turnings of the cata 
comb, it seemed that she was to encounter nothing more 
abhorrent than charnel mold and century-sifted dust; 
nothing more formidable than the serried sarcophagi that 
lined the deeply hewn shelves of stone: sarcophagi that 
had stood silent and undisturbed ever since the time of 
their deposition. Here, surely the slumber of all the dead 
was unbroken, and the nullity of death was inviolate. 

Almost the queen doubted that Thulos had preceded 
her there; till, turning her light on the ground, she dis 
cerned the print of his poulaines, long-tipped and slender 
in the deep dust amid those footmarks left by the rudely 
shod sextons. And she saw that the footprints of Thulos 
pointed only in one direction, while those of the others 
plainly went and returned. 

Then, at an undetermined distance in the shadows 
ahead, Xantlicha heard a sound in which the sick moan 
ing of some amorous woman was blent with a snarling as 
of jackals over their meat. Her blood returned frozen 
upon her heart as she went onward step by slow step, 
clutching her dagger in a hand drawn sharply back, and 
holding the light high in advance. The sound grew louder 
and more distinct; and there came to her now a perfume 
as of flowers in some warm June night; but, as she still 
advanced, the perfume was mixed with more and more of 
a smothering foulness such as she had never heretofore 
known, and was touched with the hot reeking of blood. 

A few paces more, and Xantlicha stood as if a demon’s 
arm had arrested her: for her lanthom’s light had found 
the inverted face and upper body of Thulos, hanging 
from the end of a burnished, new-wrought sarcophagus 
that occupied a scant interval between others green with 
rust. One of Thulos’ hands clutched rigidly the rim of the 
sarcophagus, while the other hand, moving feebly, seemed 
to caress a dim shape that leaned above him with arms 
showing jasmine-white in the narrow beam, and dark fin 
gers plunging into his bosom. His head and body seemed 
but an empty hull, and his hand hung skeleton-thin on 


the bronze rim, and his whole aspect was vein-drawn, as 
if he had lost more blood than was evident on his tom 
throat and face, and in his sodden raiment and dripping 
hair. 

From the thing stooping above Thulos, there came 
ceaselessly that sound which was half moan and half 
snarl. And as Xantlicha stood in petrific fear and loath 
ing, she seemed to hear from Thulos’ lips an indistinct 
murmur, more of ecstasy than pain. The murmur ceased, 
and his head hung slacklier than before, so that the queen 
deemed him verily dead. At this she found such wrathful 
courage as enabled her to step nearer and raise the lan- 
thom higher: for, even amid her extreme panic, it came 
to her that by means of the wizard-poisoned dagger she 
might still haply slay the thing that had slain Thulos. 

Waveringly the light crept aloft, disclosing inch by inch 
that infamy which Thulos had caressed in the darkness. 
... It crept even to the crimson-smeared wattles, and 
the fanged and ruddled orifice that was half mouth and 
half beak ... till Xantlicha knew why the body of Thu 
los was a mere shrunken hull. ... In what the queen 
saw, there remained nothing of Halotha except the white, 
voluptuous arms, and a vague outline of human breasts 
melting momently into breasts that were not human, like 
clay molded by a demon sculptor. The arms too began to 
change and darken; and, as they changed, the dying hand 
of Thulon stirred again and fumbled with a caressing 
movement toward the horror. And the thing seemed to 
heed him not but withdrew its fingers from his bosom, 
and reached across him with members stretching enor 
mously, as if to claw the queen or fondle her with its 
dribbling talons. 

It was then that Xantlicha let fall the lanthom and the 
dagger, and ran with shrill, endless shriekings and laugh 
ters of immitigable madness from the vault. 

The Weaver in the Vault 


The instructions of Famorgh, fifty-ninth king of 
Tasuun, were minutely circumstantial and explicit, and 
moreover, were not to be disobeyed without the incurring 
of penalties that would make mere death a pleasant thing. 
Yanur, Grotara, and Thirlain Ludoch, three of the king’s 
hardiest henchmen, riding forth at mom from the palace 
in Miraab, debated with a thin semblance of jocosity 
whether, in their case, obedience or disobedience would 
prove the direr evil. 

The commission they had just received from Famorgh 
was no less distasteful than singular. They were to visit 
Chaon Gacca, the long-forsaken seat of the kings of Tas 
uun, lying more than ninety miles to the north of Miraab; 
and, descending into the burial-vaults beneath the ruined 
palace, were to find and bring back to Miraab whatever 
remained of the mummy of King Tnepreez, founder of 
the dynasty to which Famorgh belonged. No one had en 
tered Chaon Gacca for centuries; and the preservation of 
its dead in the catacombs was uncertain: but even if only 
the skull of Tnepreez was left, or the bone of his little 
finger, or the dust of mummia into which he had crum 
bled, the men-at-arms were to fetch it carefully, guarding 
it like a holy relic. 

“ *Tis an errand for hyenas, rather than warriors,” 
grumbled Yanur in his black and spade-shaped beard. 
“By the god Yululun, keeper of the tombs, I deem it an 
ill thing to disturb the peaceful dead. And truly it is not 
well for men to enter Chaon Gacca, where Death has 
made his capital, and has gathered all the ghouls to do 
him homage.” 

“The king should have sent his embalmers,” opined 
Grotara. He was the youngest and hugest of the three, 


being taller by a full head than Yanur or Thirlain Lu- 
doch; and like them, he was a veteran of savage wars and 
desperate perils. 

“Yea, I said it was an errand for hyenas,” rejoined 
Yanur. “But the king knew well that there were no mor 
tal beings in all Miraab, saving ourselves, who would dare 
to enter the accursed vaults of Chaon Gacca. Two centu 
ries ago, King Mandis, wishing to retrieve the golden mir 
ror of Queen Avaina for his favorite leman, commanded 
two of his bravos to descend within the vaults, where the 
mummy of Avaina sits enthroned in her separate tomb, 
holding the mirror in her withered hand. . . . And the 
bravos went to Chaon Gacca . . . but they did not return; 
and King Mandis, being warned by a soothsayer, 
made no second attempt to procure the mirror, but con 
tented his leman with another gift.” 

“Yanur, thy tales would gladden those who wait the 
scything of the executioner,” said Thirlain Ludoch, the 
oldest of the trio, whose brown beard was faded to a 
hempen hue by desert suns. “But I chide thee not. It is 
common knowledge that the catacombs are ridden with 
worse hauntings than those of liches or phantoms. 
Strange devils came there long ago from the mad, un 
holy desert of Dloth; and I have heard it told that the 
kings forsook Chaon Gacca because of certain Shadows, 
that appeared at full noon in the palace halls, with no vis 
ible form to cast them, and would not depart thereafter, 
being changeless amid all the changings of the light, and 
wholly un dimm ed by the exorcisms of priests and sorcer 
ers. Men say that the flesh of any who dared to touch the 
Shadows, or to tread upon them, became black and pu 
trid like the flesh of month-old corpses, all in a mere in 
stant. Because of such testing, when one of the Shadows 
came and sat upon his throne, the right hand of King 
Agmeni rotted to the wrist, and fell away like the slough 
ing of a leper. . . . And after that, no man would dwell 
in Chaon Gacca.” 

“Verily, I have heard other stories,” said Yanur. “The 
town’s abandonment was due mainly to the failure of the 
wells and cisterns, from which the water vanished follow- 


ing an earthquake that left the land riven with hell-deep 
chasms. The palace of the kings was sundered to its neth 
ermost vault by one of the chasms; and King Agmeni was 
seized by a violent madness when he inhaled the infernal 
vapors issuing from the rent; nor was he ever wholly sane 
in his latter lifetime, after the quitting of Chaon Gacca 
and the rearing of Miraab.” 

“Now that is a tale that I can believe,” said Grotara. 
“And surely I must deem that Famorgh has inherited the 
madness of his forefather, Agmeni. Methinks that the 
royal house of Tasuun rots and totters to its fall. Harlots 
and sorcerers swarm in the palace of Famorgh like char 
nel-worms; and how, in this princess Lunalia of Xylac 
whom he has taken to wife, he has found a harlot and a 
witch in one. He has sent us on this errand at the 
prompting of Lunalia, who desires the mummy of Tne- 
preez for her own unhallowed purpose. Tnepreez, I have 
heard, was a great wizard in his time; and Lunalia would 
avail herself of the potent virtue of his bones and dust in 
the brewing of her philters. Pah! I like not the task of 
such purveyance. There are mummies enow in Miraab for 
the making of potions to madden the Queen’s lovers. Fa 
morgh is utterly besotted and befooled.” 

“Beware,” admonished Thirlain Ludoch, “for Lunalia 
is a vampire who lusts ever for the young and strong . . . 
and thy turn may come next, O Grotara, if fortune brings 
us back alive from this enterprise. I have seen her watch 
ing thee.” 

“I would sooner mate with the wild lamia,” protested 
Grotara in virtuous indignation. 

“Thine aversion would help thee not,” said Thirlain 
Ludoch . . . “for I know others who have drunk the po 
tions. . . . But we are now nearing the last wineshop in 
Miraab; and my throat is dusty beforehand with the very 
thought of this journey. I shall need a whole stoup of 
wine from Yoros to wash the dust away.” 

“Thou sayest sooth,” agreed Yanur. “Already I have 
become dry as the mummy of Tnepreez. And thou, Gro 
tara?” 


“I will quaff any drink, if it be not the philter-brew of 
Queen Lunalia.” 

Mounted on swift, untiring dromedaries, and followed 
by a fourth camel bearing on its back a light wooden sar 
cophagus for the accommodation of King Tnepreez, the 
three henchmen had soon left behind them the bright and 
noisy streets of Miraab, and the fields of sesame, the 
crofts of apricot and pomegranate, lying for miles about 
the city. Before noon, they had parted from the route of 
caravans, and had taken a road that was seldom used by 
any but lions and jackals. However, the way to Chaon 
Gacca was plain, for the ruts of olden chariots were still 
deeply marked in the desert soil, where rain no longer fell 
at any season. 

On the first night, they slept beneath the cold and 
crowding stars, and kept watch by turn lest a lion should 
come upon them unaware, or a viper should crawl among 
them for warmth. During the second day they passed 
amid steepening hills and ravines that retarded their pro 
gress. Here there was no rustling of serpent or lizard, and 
naught but their own voices and the shuffling of the cam 
els to break the silence that lay upon all things like a 
mute malediction. Sometimes, on the desiccating tors 
above them, against the darkly litten sky, they saw the 
boughs of century-withered cacti, or the boles of trees 
that immemorial fires had blasted. 

The second sunset found them in sight of Chaon 
Gacca, rearing its dilapidated walls at a distance of less 
than five leagues in a broad open valley. Coming then to 
a wayside shrine of Yuclda, the small and grotesque god 
of laughter, whose influence was believed to be mainly 
benignant, they were glad to go no farther on that day, 
but took shelter in the crumbling shrine for fear of the 
ghouls and devils, who might dwell in such vicinage to 
those accursed ruins. They had brought with them from 
Miraab a wine-skin filled with the fervent ruby wine of 
Yoros; and though the skin was now three-fourths empty, 
they poured a libation in the twilight on the broken altar, 
and prayed to Yuckla for such protection as he might 
give them against the demons of the night. 


They slept on the worn and chilly flags about the altar, 
watching by turn, as before. Grotara, who kept the third 
watch, beheld at last the paling of the close-hung stars, 
and aroused his companions in a dawn that was like a 
sifting of ashes through the cinder-black darkness. 

After a scanty meal of figs and dried goat-flesh, they 
resumed their journey, guiding their camels down the val 
ley, and weaving back and forth on the bouldered slopes 
when they came to abysmal rents in the earth and rock. 
Their approach to the ruins was rendered slow and tor 
tuous by such divagations. The way was lined by the 
stocks of orchard trees that had perished long ago, and 
by cotes and granges where even the hyena no longer 
made his lair. 

Because of their many detours, it was hard upon noon 
when they rode through the hollow-ringing streets of the 
city. Like ragged purple cloaks, the shadows of the ruin 
ing houses were drawn close to their walls and portals. 
Everywhere the havoc of earthquake was manifest, and 
the fissured avenues and mounded mansions served to 
verify the tales that Yanur had heard concerning the rea 
son of the city’s abandonment 

The palace of the kings, however, was still pre-eminent 
above the other buildings. A tumbled pile, it frowned in 
dark porphyry on a low acropolis amid the northern 
quarter. For the making of this acropolis, a hiil of red 
syenite had been stripped of its covering soil in elder 
days, and had been hewn to sheer and rounding walls, 
circled by a road that wound slowly about it to the sum 
mit. Following this road, and nearing the portals of the 
courtyard, the henchmen of Famorgh came to a fissure 
that clove their path from wall to precipice, yawning far 
in the cliff. The chasm was less than a yard in width; but 
the dromedaries balked before it. The three dismounted; 
and, leaving the camels to await their return, they leapt 
lightly across the fissure. Grotara and Thirlain Ludoch 
carrying the sarcophagus, and Yanur bearing the wine 
skin, they passed beneath the shattered barbican. 

The great courtyard was heavily strewn with the 
wreckage of once-lofty towers and balconies, over which 


the warriors climbed with much wariness, eyeing the 
shadows closely, and loosening their swords in the sheath, 
as if they were surmounting the barricades of a hidden 
foe. All three were startled by the pale and naked form of 
a colossean female, which they saw reclining on the 
blocks and rubble in a portico beyond the court. But, 
drawing nearer, they found that the shape was not that of 
a she-demon, as they had apprehended, but was merely a 
marble statue that had once stood like a caryatid among 
the mighty pillars. 

Following the directions given them by Famorgh, they 
entered the main hall. Here, beneath the chasmed and 
collapsing roof, they moved with the utmost caution, fear 
ing that a light jar, a whisper, would bring the suspended 
ruin upon their heads like an avalanche. Overturned tri 
pods of greening copper, tables and trivets of splintered 
ebony, and the shards of gayly painted porcelains, were 
mingled with the huge fragments of pedestals and fusts 
and entablatures; and upon a shivered dais of green, 
blood-spotted heliotrope, the tarnished silver throne of 
the kings careened amid the mutilated sphinxes, carved 
from jasper, that kept eternal guard beside it. 

At the farther end of the hall, they found an alcove, 
still unblocked by fallen debris, in which were the stairs 
that led downward to the catacombs. They paused briefly 
ere beginning their descent. Yanur applied himself with 
out ceremony to the skin which he carried, and lightened 
it considerably before giving it into the hands of Thirlain 
Ludoch, who had marked his potations with solicitude. 
Thirlain Ludoch and Grotara drank the remainder of the 
vintage between them; and the latter did not grumble at 
the thick lees which fell to his lot Thus replenished, they 
lit three torches of pitchy terebinth, which they had 
brought along in the sarcophagus. Yanur led the way, 
daring the tenebrous depths with drawn sword, and a 
torch flaming smokily in his left hand. His companions 
followed, bearing the sarcophagus, in which, by raising 
the hinged lid slightly, they had socketed the other 
torches. The potent wine of Yoros mounted within them, 
driving away their shadowy fears and apprehensions. All 


three were seasoned drinkers, and they moved with great 
care and circumspection, and did not stumble on the dim, 
uncertain steps. 

Passing through a series of wine cellars, full of cracked 
and sharded jars, they came at last, after many zigzag 
plungings of the stairs, to a vast corridor hewn in the 
nether syenite, below the level of the city streets. It 
stretched before them through illimitable gloom, its walls 
unshattered, and its roof admitting no crevice-filtered ray. 
It seemed that they had entered some impregnable citadel 
of the dead. On the right hand were the tombs of the 
elder kings; on the left were the sepulchers of the queens; 
and lateral passages led to a world of subsidiary vaults, 
reserved for other members of the royal family. At the 
farther end of the main hall they would find the burial 
chamber of Tnepreez. 

Yanur, following the right-hand wall, soon came to the 
first tomb. According to custom, its portals were open, 
and were lower than a man’s stature, so that all who en 
tered must bow in humbleness to death. Yanur held his 
torch to the lintel, and read stumblingly the legend graven 
in the stone, which told that the vault was that of King 
Achamil, father of Agmeni. 

“Verily,” he said, “we shall find nothing here, other 
than the harmless dead.” Then, the wine he had drunk 
impelling him to a sort of bravado, he stooped before the 
portals and thrust his flickering flambeau into the tomb of 
Achamil. 

Surprised, he swore a loud and soldierly oath, that 
made the others drop their burden and crowd behind 
him. Peering into the square, concamerated chamber, 
which had a kingly spaciousness, they saw that it was un 
occupied by any visible tenant. The tall chair of mysti 
cally graven gold and ebony, in which the mummy should 
have sat crowned and robed as in life, was addorsed 
against the farther wall on a low dais. In it there lay an 
empty robe of sable and carmine, and a miter-shaped 
crown of silver set with black sapphires, as if the dead 
king had doffed them and had gone away! 

Startled, with the wine dying swiftly in their brains, the 


warriors felt the crawling chill of an unknown mystery. 
Yanur, however, steeled hims elf to enter the vault. He ex 
amined the shadowy comers, he lifted and shook the rai 
ment of Achamil, but found no clue to the riddle of the 
mummy’s disappearance. The tomb was clean of dust, 
and there was no sign nor faintest odor of mortal decay. 

Yanur rejoined his comrades, and the three eyed one 
another in eery consternation. They resumed their explor 
ing of the hall; and Yanur, as he came to the doorway of 
each tomb, paused before it and thrust his flambeau into 
the wavering murk, only to discover an empty throne, 
and the cast-off regalia of royalty. There was, it seemed, 
no reasonable explanation for the vanishing of the mum 
mies, in whose preservation the powerful spices of the 
Orient had been employed, together with natron, render 
ing them virtually incorruptible. From the circumstances, 
it did not appear that they had been removed by human 
robbers, who would hardly have left behind the precious 
jewels, fabrics and metals; and it was even more unlikely 
that they had been devoured by animals: for in that case 
the bones would have remained, and the vestments would 
have been tom and disordered. The mythic terrors of 
Chaon Gacca began to assume a darker imminence: and 
the seekers peered and listened fearfully as they went on 
in the hushed sepulchral hall. 

Presently, after they had verified the vacancy of more 
than a dozen tombs, they saw the glimmering of several 
steely objects before them on the floor of the corridor. 
These, on investigation, proved to be two swords, two 
helmets and cuirasses of a slightly antiquated type, such 
as had formerly been worn by the warriors of Tasuun. 
They might well have belonged to the unretuming bravos 
sent by King Mandis to retrieve the mirror of Avaina. 

Yanur, Grotara and Thirlain Ludoch, viewing these 
sinister relics, were seized by an almost frantic desire to 
accomplish their errand and regain the sunlight. They 
hurried on, no longer pausing to inspect the separate 
tombs, and debating, as they went, the curious problem 
that would be presented if the mummy sought by Fa- 
morgh and Lunalia should have vanished like the others. 


The king had commanded them to fetch the remains of 
Tnepreez; and they knew that no excuse or explanation 
of their failure to do this would be accepted. Under such 
circumstances, their return to Miraab would be inadvis 
able; and the only safety would lie in flight beyond the 
northern desert, along the route of caravans to Zul-Bha- 
Sair or Xylac. 

It seemed that they traversed an enormous distance, 
among the more ancient vaults. Here the formation of the 
stone was softer and more friable, and the earthquake 
had wrought considerable damage. The floor was littered 
with detritus, the sides and roof were full of fractures, 
and some of the chambers had partially fallen in, so that 
their vacancy was revealed to the casual peering of Yanur 
and his companions. 

Nearing the hall’s end they were confronted by a 
chasm, dividing both floor and roof, and slitting the sill 
and lintel of the last chamber. The gulf was about four 
feet wide, and the torch of Yanur could not disclose its 
bottom. He found the name of Tnepreez on the lintel, 
whose antique inscription, telling the deeds and titles of 
the king, had been sundered in twain by the cataclysm. 
Then, walking on a narrow ledge, he entered the vault. 
Grotara and Thirlain Ludoch crowded behind him, leaving 
the sarcophagus in the hall. 

The sepulchral throne of Tnepreez, overturned and 
broken, was lying across the fissure that had rifted the 
whole tomb from side to side. There was no trace of the 
mummy, which, from the chair’s inverted position, had 
doubtless fallen into those yawning depths in the hour of 
its overthrow. 

Before the seekers could voice their disappointment 
and dismay, the silence about them was broken by a dull 
rumbling as of distant thunder. The stone trembled be 
neath their feet, the walls shook and wavered, and the 
rumbling noise, in long, shuddering undulations, grew 
louder and more ominous. The solid floor appeared to 
rise and flow with a continuous, sickening motion; and 
then, as they turned to flee, it seemed that the universe 


came down upon them in a roaring deluge of night and 
ruin. 

Grotara, wakening in darkness, was aware of an ago 
nizing burden, as if some monumental shaft were builded 
on his crushed feet and lower legs. His head throbbed 
and ached as if from the stroke of a stunning mace. He 
found that his arms and body were free; but the pain in 
his extremities became insufferable, causing him to swoon 
anew, when he tried to drag them from beneath their in 
cumbrance. 

- Terror closed upon him like the clutch of ghoulish fin 
gers as he realized his situation. An earthquake, such as 
had caused the abandonment of Chaon Gacca, had oc 
curred; and he and his fellows were entombed in the cata 
combs. He called aloud, repeating the names of Yanur 
and Thirlain Ludoch many times; but there was no groan 
nor rustle to assure him that they still lived. 

Reaching out with his right hand, he encountered nu 
merous pieces of rubble. Slewing himself toward them, he 
found several boulder-sized fragments of stone, and 
among them a smooth and roundish thing, with a sharp 
ridge in the center, which he knew for the crested helmet 
worn by one of his companions. Even with the most pain 
ful striving, he could reach no farther, and was unable to 
identify the owner. The metal was heavily dented, and the 
comb was bent as if by the impact of some ponderous 
mass. 

In spite of his predicament, the fierce nature of Gro 
tara refused to yield itself to despair. He drew himself to 
a sitting position, and, doubling forward, he contrived to 
reach the enormous block that had fallen across his 
nether limbs. He pushed against it with herculean effort, 
raging like a trapped lion, but the mass was immovable. 
For hours, it seemed, he strove as if with some monstrous 
cacodemon. His frenzy was calmed only by exhaustion. 
He lay back at length; and the darkness weighed upon 
him like a living thing, and seemed to gnaw him with 
fangs of pain and horror. 

Delirium hovered near, and he thought that he heard a 
dim and hideous humming, far below in the stony bowels 


of the earth. The noise grew louder, as if ascending from 
a riven hell. He became aware of a wan, unreal light that 
wavered above him, disclosing in doubtful glimpses the 
shattered roof. The light strengthened; and lifting himself 
a little, he saw that it poured from the earthquake chasm 
in the floor. 

It was a light such as he had never seen: a livid luster, 
that was not the reflection of lamp or torch or firebrand. 
Somehow, as if the senses of hearing and sight were con 
fused, he identified it with the hideous humming. 

Like a sourceless dawn, the luminosity crept upon the 
ruin wrought by the temblor. Grotara saw that the whole 
entrance of the tomb, and much of its concameration, 
had caved in. A fragment, striking him on the head, had 
knocked him senseless; and a huge section of the roof 
had fallen across his extremities. 

The bodies of Thirlain Ludoch and Yanur were lying 
close to the broadened chasm. Both, he felt sure, were 
dead. The grizzled beard of Thirlain Ludoch was dark 
and stiff with blood that had run down from the crushed 
cranium; and Yanur was half buried in a pile of blocks 
and detritus, from which his torso and left arm were 
emergent. His torch had burned itself out in his stiffly 
clutching fingers, as if a blackened socket. 

All this Grotara noted in a dreamlike manner. Then he 
perceived the real source of the strange illumination. A 
coldly shining, hueless globe, round as a puffball and 
large as a human head, had risen from the fissure and 
was hovering above it like a mimic moon. The thing os 
cillated with a slight but ceaseless vibratory motion. From 
it, as if caused by this vibration, the heavy humming 
poured, and the light fell in ever-trembling waves. 

A dim awe was upon Grotara; but he felt no terror. It 
seemed that the light and sound were woven upon his 
senses like some Lethean spell. Rigid he sat, forgetful of 
his pain and despair, while the globe hovered for a few 
instants above the chasm, and then floated slowly and 
horizontally, till it hung directly over the upturned fea 
tures of Yanur. 

With the same deliberate slowness, the same ceaseless 


oscillation, it descended upon the face and neck of the 
dead man, which appeared to melt away like tallow as the 
globe settled lower and lower. The humming deepened, 
the globe flamed with an eerie luster, and its deathlike 
pallor was mottled with an impure iris. It swelled and 
bloated obscenely, while the whole head of the warrior 
shrank within the helmet, and the plates of his cuirass fell 
in as if the very torso were shriveling beneath them. 

Grotara’s eyes beheld the horrific vision clearly, but his 
brain was numbed as if by a merciful hemlock. It was 
hard to remember, hard to think . . . but somehow he 
recalled the empty tombs, the ownerless crown and vest 
ments. The enigma of the missing mummies, over which 
he and his companions had puzzled vainly, was now resolved. 
But the thing that battened upon Yanur was be 
yond all mortal knowledge or surmise. It was some 
ghoulish denizen of a nether world, set free by the demons of earthquake. 

Now, in the catalepsy that thralled him, he saw the 
gradual settling of the piled d6bris in which the legs and 
hips of Yanur were inhumed. The helmet and body-mail 
were like empty shards, the outflung arm had withered, 
had shortened, and the very bones were dwindling away, 
appearing to melt and liquefy. The globe had grown enor 
mous. It was flushed with unclean ruby, like a vampire 
moon. From it there issued palpable ropes and filaments, 
pearly, shuddering into strange colors, that appeared to 
fasten themselves to the ruined floor and walls and roof, 
like the weaving of a spider. Thickly and more thickly 
they multiplied, forming a curtain between Grotara and 
the chasm, and falling upon Thirlain Ludoch and himself, 
till he saw the sanguine burning of the globe as through 
arabesques of baleful opal. 

Now the web had filled the entire tomb. It ran and glis 
tened with a hundred changing hues, it dripped with glo 
ries drawn from the spectrum of dissolution. It bloomed 
with ghostly blossoms, and foliages that grew and faded 
as if by necromancy. The eyes of Grotara were blinded; 
more and more he was meshed in the weird web. 


Unearthly, chill as the fingers of death, its gossamers 
clung and quivered upon his face and hands. 

He could not tell the duration of the weaving, the term 
of his enthr allm ent. Dimly, at last, he beheld the thinning 
of the luminous threads, the retraction of the trembling 
arabesques. The globe, a thing of evil beauty, alive and 
aware in some holocryptic fashion, had risen now from 
the empty armor of Yanur. Diminishing to its former size, 
and putting off its colors of blood and opal, it hung for a 
little above the chasm. Grotara felt that it was watching 
him . . . was watching Thirlain Ludoch. Then, like a sat 
ellite of the nether caverns, it fell slowly into the fissure, 
and the light faded from the tomb and left Grotara in 
deepening darkness. 

After that, there were ages of fever, thirst and mad 
ness, of torment and slumber, and recurrent stragglings 
against the fallen block that held him prisoner. He bab 
bled insanely, he howled like a wolf; or, lying supine and 
silent, he heard the multitudinous, muttering voices of 
ghouls that conspired against him. Gangrening swiftly, his 
crashed extremities seemed to throb like those of a Titan. 
He drew his sword with the strength of delirium, and en 
deavored to saw hims elf free at the shins, only to swoon 
from loss of blood. 

Awakening feebly, and scarce able to lift his head, he 
saw that the light had returned, and heard once more the 
incessant vibrant humming that filled the vault. His min d 
was clear, and a weak terror stirred within him: for he 
knew that the Weaver had risen again from the chasm 
. . . and knew the reason of its coming. 

He turned his head laboriously, and watched the glow 
ing ball as it hung and oscillated, and then came down in 
leisurely descent on the face of Thirlain Ludoch. Again 
he saw it bloat obscenely, like a blood-flushed moon, fed 
with the wasting of the old warrior’s body. Again, with 
dazzled eyes, he beheld the weaving of the web of impure 
iris, patterned with deathly splendor, veiling the ruinous 
catacomb with its weird illusions. Again, like a dying bee 
tle, he was meshed in its chill, unearthly strands; and its 
necromantic flowers, blooming and perishing, latticed the 


void air above him. But, ere the retracting of the web, his 
delirium came upon him and brought a demon-peopled 
darkness; and the Weaver finished its toil unseen, and returned 
unheeded to the chasm. 

He tossed in the hells of fever, or lay at the black, un 
divined nadir of oblivion. But death tarried, still aloof; 
and he lived on by virtue of his youth and giant strength. 
Once more, toward the end, his senses cleared, and he 
saw for the third time the unholy light and heard again 
the odious humming. The Weaver was poised above him, 
pale, shining and vibrant . . . and he knew that it was 
waiting for him to die. 

Lifting his sword with weak fingers, he sought to drive 
it away. But the thing hovered, alert and vigilant, beyond 
his reach; and he thought that it watched him like a vul 
ture. The sword dropped from his hand. The luminous 
horror did not depart. It drew nearer, like an eyeless per 
tinacious face; and it seemed to follow him, swooping 
through the ultimate night as he fell deathward. 

With none to behold the glory of its weaving, with 
darkness before and after, the Weaver spun its final web 
in the tomb of Tnepreez. 


The Witchcraft of Ulua 

Sabmon the anchorite was famed no less for his piety 
than for his prophetic wisdom and knowledge of the dark 
art of sorcery. He had dwelt alone for two generations in 
a curious house on the rim of the northern desert of Tas- 
uun: a house whose floor and walls were built from the 
large bones of dromedaries, and whose roof was a wat 
tling composed of the smaller bones of wild dogs and 
men and hyenas. These ossuary relics, chosen for their 
whiteness and symmetry, were bound securely together 
witlf well-tanned thongs, and were joined and fitted with 


marvelous closeness, leaving no space for the blown sand 
to penetrate. This house was the pride of Sabmon, who 
swept it daily with a besom of mummy’s hair, till it shone 
immaculate as polished ivory both within and without. 

Despite his remoteness and reclusion, and the hard 
ships that attended a journey to his abode, Sabmon was 
much consulted by the people of Tasuun, and was even 
sought by pilgrims from the farther shores of . 
However, though not ungracious or inhospitable, he often 
ignored the queries of his visitors, who, as a rule, wished 
merely to divine the future or to ask advice concerning 
the most advantageous government of their affairs. He 
became more and more taciturn with age, and spoke little 
with men in his last years. It was said, perhaps not un 
truly, that he preferred to talk with the murmuring palms 
about his well, or the wandering stars that went over his 
hermitage. 

In the summer of Sabmon’s ninety-third year, there 
came to him the youth Amalzain, his great-nephew, and 
the son of a niece that Sabmon had loved dearly in days 
before his retirement to a gymnosophic seclusion. Amal 
zain, who had spent all of his one-and-twenty years in the 
upland home of his parents, was on his way to Miraab, 
the capital of Tasuun, where he would serve as a cup 
bearer to Famorgh the king. This post, obtained for him 
by influential friends of his father, was much coveted 
among the youth of the land, and would lead to high ad 
vancement if he were fortunate enough to win the king’s 
favor. In accord with his mother’s wish, he had come to 
visit Sabmon and to ask the counsel of the sage regarding 
various problems of worldly conduct. 

Sabmon, whose eyes were undimmed by age and as 
tronomy and much poring over volumes of archaic ci 
phers, was pleased with Amalzain and found in the boy 
something of his mother’s beauty. And for this reason he 
gave freely of his hoarded wisdom; and, after uttering 
many profound and pertinent maxims, he said to Amal 
zain: 

“It is indeed well that you have come to me: for, inno 
cent of the world’s turpitude, you fare to a city of strange 


sins and strange witcheries and sorceries. There are nu 
merous evils in Miraab. Its women are witches and har 
lots, and their beauty is a foulness wherein the young, the 
strong, the valiant, are limed and taken.” 

Then, ere Amalzain departed, Sabmon gave to him a 
small amulet of silver, graven curiously with the migniard 
skeleton of a girl. And Sabmon said: 

“I counsel you to wear this amulet at all times hence 
forward. It contains a pinch of ashes from the pyre of 
Yos Ebni, sage and archimage, who won supremacy over 
men and demons in elder years by defying all mortal 
temptation and putting down the insubordination of the 
flesh. There is a virtue in these ashes, and they will pro 
tect you from such evils as were overcome by Yos Ebni. 
And yet, peradventure, there are ills and enchantments in 
Miraab from which the amulet can not defend you. In 
such case you must return to me. I shall watch over you 
carefully, and shall know all that occurs to you in Mi 
raab: for I have long since become the owner of certain 
rare faculties of sight and hearing whose exercise is not 
debarred or limi ted by mere distance.” 

Amalzain, being ignorant of the matters at which Safr- 
mon hinted, was somewhat bewildered by this peroration. 
But he received the amulet gratefully. Then, bidding Sab 
mon a reverential farewell, he resumed his journey to Mi 
raab, wondering much as to the fortune that would befall 
him in that sinful and many-legended city. 

Famorgh, who had grown old and senile amid his debaucheries, was the ruler of an aging, semi-desert land; 
and his court was a place of farsought luxury, of obliqui- 
tous refinement and corruption. The youth Amalzain, ac 
customed only to the simple manners, the rude virtues 
and vices of country-dwelling folk, was dazzled at first by 
the sybaritic life around him . But a certain innate 
strength of character, fortified by the moral teachings of 
his parents and the precepts of his great-uncle, Sabmon, 
preserved him from any grave errors or lapses. 

Thus it was that he served as a cupbearer at bacchana 
lian revels, but remained abstemious throughout, pouring 
night after night in the ruby-crusted cup of Famorgh the 


maddening wines that were drugged with cannabis and 
the stupefying arrack with its infusion of poppy. With un 
tainted heart and flesh he beheld the infamous mummer 
ies whereby the courtiers, vying with each other in 
shamelessness, attempted to lighten the king’s ennui. 
Feeling only wonder or disgust, he watched the nimble 
and lascivious contortions of black dancers from Dooza 
Thom in the north, or saffron-bodied girls from the 
southern isles. His parents, who believed implicitly in the 
superhuman goodness of monarchs, had not prepared him 
for this spectacle of royal vice; but the reverence they had 
instilled so thoroughly into Amalzain led him to regard it 
all as being the peculiar but mysterious prerogative of the 
kings of Tasuun. 

During his first month in Miraab, Amalzain heard 
much of the Princess Ulua, sole daughter of Famorgh and 
Queen Lunalia; but since the women of the royal family 
seldom attended the banquets or appeared in public, he 
did not see her. The huge and shadowy palace, however, 
was filled with whispers concerning her amours. Ulua, he 
was told, had inherited the sorceries of her mother Luna 
lia, whose dark, luxurious beauty, so often sung by be 
witched poets, was now fallen to a haggish decrepitude. 
The lovers of Ulua were innumerable, and she often pro 
cured their passion or insured their fidelity by other 
charms than those of her person. Though little taller than 
a child, she was exquisitely formed and endowed with the 
loveliness of some female demon that might haunt the 
slumbers of youth. She was feared by many and her ill 
will was deemed a dangerous thing. Famorgh, no less 
blind to her sins and witcheries than he had been to those 
of Lunalia, indulged her in all ways and denied her noth 
ing. 

Amalzain’s duties left him much idle time, for Fa 
morgh usually slept the double sleep of age and intoxica 
tion after the evening revels. Much of this time he gave to 
the study of algebra and the reading of olden poems and 
romances. One morning, while he was engaged with cer 
tain algebraic calculations, there came to Amalzain a 
huge negress who had been pointed out to him as one of 



98  

Ulua’s waiting-women. She told him peremptorily that he 
was to follow her to the apartments of Ulua. Bewildered 
and amazed by this singular interruption of his studies, he 
was unable to reply for a moment. Thereupon, seeing his 
hesitation, the great black woman lifted him in her naked 
arms and carried him easily from the room and through 
the palace halls. Angry, and full of discomfiture, he found 
himself deposited in a chamber hung with shameless designs, where, amid the fuming of aphrodisiac vapors, the 
princess regarded him with luxurious gravity from a 
couch of fire-bright scarlet. She was small as a woman of 
the elk-folk, and voluptuous as a coiled lamia. The in 
cense floated about her like sinuous veils. 

“There are other things than the pouring of wine for a 
sottish monarch, or the study of worm-eaten volumes,” 
said Ulua in a voice that was like the flowing of hot 
honey. “Sir cupbearer, your youth should have a better 
employment than these.” 

“I ask no employment, other than my duties and stud 
ies,” replied Amalzain ungraciously. “But tell me, O prin 
cess, what is your will? Why has your serving-woman 
brought me here in a fashion so unseemly?” 

“For a youth so erudite and clever, the question should 
be needless,” answered Ulua, smiling obliquely. “See you 
not that I am beautiful and desirable? Or can it be that 
your perceptions are duller than I had thought?” 

“I do not doubt that you are beautiful,” said the boy, 
“but such matters hardly concern an humble cupbearer.” 

The vapors, mounting thickly from golden thuribles be 
fore the couch, were parted with a motion as of drawn 
draperies; and Amalzain lowered his gaze before the en 
chantress, who shook with a soft laughter that made the 
jewels upon her bosom twinkle like living eyes. 

“It would seem that those musty volumes have indeed 
blinded you,” she told him. “You have need of that eu 
phrasy which purges the sight. Go now: but return pres 
ently—of your own accord.” 

For many days thereafter, Amalzain, going about his 
duties as usual, was aware of a strange haunting. It 
seemed now that Ulua was everywhere. Appearing at the 

revels, as if by some new caprice, she flaunted her evil 
beauty in the eyes of the young cupbearer; and often, by 
day, he met her in the palace gardens and corridors. All 
men spoke of her, as if conspiring tacitly to keep her in 
his thoughts; and it seemed that even the heavy arrases 
whispered her name as they rustled in the lost winds that 
wandered through the gloomy and interminable halls. 

This, however, was not all: for her undesired image 
began to trouble his nightly dreams; and awakening, he 
heard the warm dulcet languor of her voice, and felt the 
caress of light and subtle fingers in the darkness. Peering 
at the pale moon that waxed beyond the windows, above 
the black cypresses, he saw her dead, corroded face as 
sume the living features of Ulua. The lithe and migniard 
form of the young witch appeared to move among the 
fabulous queens and goddesses that thronged the opulent 
hangings with their amours. Beheld as if through enchant 
ment, her face leaned beside his in the mirrors; and she 
came and vanished, phantom-like, with seductive mur 
murs and wanton gestures, as he bent over his books. But 
though he was perturbed by these appearances, in which 
he could scarce distinguish the real from the illusory, 
Amalzain was still indifferent toward Ulua, being surely 
protected from her charms by the amulet containing the 
ashes of Yos Ebni, saint and sage and archimage. From 
certain curious flavors detected more than once in his 
food and drink, he suspected that the love potions for 
which she had become infamous were being administered 
to him; but beyond a light and passing qualmishness, he 
experienced no ill effect whatever; and he was wholly ig 
norant of the spells woven against him in secret, and the 
thrice-lethal invultuations that were designed to wound 
his heart and senses. 

Now (though he knew it not) his indifference was a 
matter of much gossip at the court Men marveled greatly 
at such exemption: for all whom the princess had chosen 
heretofore, whether captains, cupbearers or high dignitar 
ies, or common soldiers and grooms, had yielded easily to 
her bewitchments. So it came to pass that Ulua was an 
gered, since all men knew that her beauty was scorned by 


Amalzain, and her sorcery was impotent to ensnare Mm. 
Thereupon she ceased to appear at the revels of Fa- 
morgh; and Amalzain beheld her no longer in the halls 
and gardens; and neither his dreams nor his waking hours 
were haunted any more by the spell-wrought semblance 
of Ulua. So, in his innocence, he rejoiced as one who has 
encountered a grave peril and has come forth unharmed. 

Then, later, on a moonless night, as he lay sleeping 
tranquilly in the moonless hours before dawn, there came 
to him in his dream a figure muffled from crown to heel 
with the vestments of the tomb. Tall as a caryatid, awful 
and menacing, it leaned above him in silence more malig 
nant than any curse; and the cerements fell open at the 
breast, and charnel-worms and death-scarabs and scor 
pions, together with shreds of rotting flesh, rained down 
upon Amalzain. Then, as he awoke from his nightmare, 
sick and stifled, he breathed a carrion fetor, and felt 
against him the pressure of a still, heavy body. Affrighted, 
he rose and lit the lamp; but the bed was empty. Yet the 
odor of putrefaction still lingered; and Amalzain could 
have sworn that the corpse of a woman, two weeks dead 
and teeming with maggots, had laid closely at his side in 
the darkness. 

Thereafter, for many nights, Ms slumbers were broken 
by such foulnesses as this. Hardly could he sleep at all for 
the horror of that wMch came and went, invisible but pal 
pable, in Ms chamber. Always he awoke from ill dreams, 
to find about him the stiffened arms of long-dead succubi, 
or to feel at his side the amorous trembling of flesMess 
skeletons. He was choked by the natron and bitumen of 
mummied breasts; he was crushed by the unremoving 
weight of gigantic liches; he was kissed nauseously by lips 
that were oozing tatters of corruption. 

Nor was this all; for other abominations came to him 
by day, visible, and perceived through all his senses, and 
more loathsome even than the dead. Things that seemed 
as the leavings of leprosy crawled before him at high 
noon in the halls of Famorgh; and they rose up from the 
shadows and sidled toward him, leering wMtely with faces 
that were no longer faces, and trying to caress him with 



  

their half-eaten fingers. About his ankles, as he went to 
and fro, there clung lascivious empusae with breasts that 
were furred like the bat; and serpent-bodied lamiae minced 
and pirouetted before his eyes, like the dancers before the 
king. 

No longer could he read his books or solve his prob 
lems of algebra in peace: for the letters changed from 
moment to moment beneath his scrutiny and were twisted 
into runes of evil meaning; and the signs and ciphers he 
had written were turned into devils no bigger than large 
emmets, that writhed foully across the paper as if on a 
field, performing those rites which are acceptable only to 
Alila, queen of perdition and goddess of all iniquities. 

Thus plagued and bedeviled, the youth Amalzain was 
near to madness; yet he dared not complain or speak to 
others of aught that he beheld; for he knew that these 
horrors, whether immaterial or substantial, were per 
ceived only by himself. Nightly, for the full period of a 
moon, he lay with dead things in his chamber; and daily, 
in all his comings and goings, he was besought by abhor 
rent specters. And he doubted not that all these were the 
sendings of Ulua, angered by his refusal of her love; and 
he remembered that Sabmon had hinted darkly of certain 
enchantments from which the ashes of Yos Ebni, pre 
served in the silver amulet, might be powerless to defend 
him. And, knowing that such enchantments were upon 
him now, he recalled the final injunction of the old arch 
image. 

So, feeling that there was no help for him save in the 
wizardry of Sabmon, he went before King Famorgh and 
begged a short leave of absence from the court. And Fa 
morgh, who was well pleased with the cupbearer, and 
moreover had begun to note his thinness and pallor, 
granted the request readily. 

Mounted on a palfrey chosen for speed and endurance, 
Amalzain rode northward from Miraab on a sultry morn 
ing in autumn. A strange heaviness had stilled all the air; 
and great coppery clouds were piled like towering, 
many-domed palaces of genii on the desert hills. The sun 
appeared to swim in molten brass. No vultures flew on 


the silent heavens; and the very jackals had retired to 
their lairs, as if in fear of some unknown doom. But 
Amalzain, riding swiftly toward Sabmon’s hermitage, was 
haunted still by leprous larvae that rose before him, pos 
turing foully on the dun sands; and he heard the desirous 
moaning of succubi under the hooves of his horse. 

The night waylaid him, airless and starless, as he came 
to a well amid dying palms. Here he lay sleepless, with 
the curse of Ulua still upon him: for it seemed that the 
dry, dusty liches of desert tombs reclined rigidly at his 
side; and bony fingers wooed him toward the unfathom 
able sand pits from which they had risen. 

Weary and devil-ridden, he reached the wattled house 
of Sabmon at noon of the next day. The sage greeted him 
affectionately, showing no surprise, and listened to his 
story with the air of one who harkens a twice-told tale. 

“These things, and more, were known to me from the 
beginning,” he said to Amalzain. “I could have saved you 
from the sendings of Ulua ere now; but it was my wish 
that you should come to me at this time, forsaking the 
court of the dotard Famorgh and the evil city of Miraab, 
whose iniquities are now at the full. The imminent doom 
of Miraab, though unread by her astrologers, has been 
declared in the heavens; and I would not that you should 
share the doom. 

“It is needful,” he went on, “that the spells of Ulua 
should be broken on this very day, and the sendings returned 
to her that sent them; since otherwise they would 
haunt you for ever, remaining as a visible and tangible 
plague when the witch herself has gone to her black lord, 
Thasaidon, in the seventh hell.” 

Then, to the wonderment of Amalzain, the old magi 
cian brought forth from a cabinet of ivory an elliptic mir 
ror of dark and burnished metal and placed it before him. 
The mirror was held aloft by the muffled hands of a 
veiled image; and peering within it, Amalzain saw neither 
his own face nor the face of Sabmon, nor aught of the 
room itself reflected. And Sabmon enjoined him to watch 
the mirror closely, and then repaired to a small oratory 


that was curtained from the chamber with long and 
queerly painted rolls of camel-parchment. 

Watching the mirror, Amalzain was aware that certain 
of the sendings of Ulua came and went beside him, striv 
ing ever to gain his attention with unclean gestures such 
as harlots use. But resolutely he fixed his eyes on the void 
and unreflecting metal; and anon he heard the voice of 
Sabmon chanting without pause the powerful words of an 
antique formula of exorcism; and now from between the 
oratory curtains there issued the intolerable pungency of 
burning spices, such as are employed to drive away demons. 

Then Amalzain perceived, without lifting his eyes from 
the mirror, that the sendings of Ulua had vanished like 
vapors blown away by the desert wind. But in the mirror 
a scene limned itself darkly, and he seemed to look on 
the marble towers of the city of Miraab beneath over- 
looming bastions of ominous cloud. Then the scene 
shifted, and he saw the palace hall where Famorgh nod 
ded in wine-stained purple senile and drunken, amid his 
ministers and sycophants. Again the mirror changed, and 
he beheld a room with tapestries of shameless design, 
where, on a couch of fire-bright crimson, the Princess 
Ulua sat with her latest lovers amid the fuming of golden 
thuribles. 

Marveling as he peered within the mirror, Amalzain 
witnessed a strange thing; for the vapors of the thuribles, 
mounting thickly and voluminously, took from instant to 
instant the form of those very apparitions by which he 
had been bedeviled so long. Ever they rose and multi 
plied, till the chamber teemed with the spawn of hell and 
the vomitings of the riven charnel. Between Ulua and the 
lover at her right hand, who was a captain of the king’s 
guard, there coiled a monstrous lamia, enfolding them 
both in its serpentine volumes and crushing them with its 
human bosom; and close at her left hand appeared a 
half-eaten corpse, leering with lipless teeth, from whose 
cerements worms were sifted upon Ulua and her second 
lover, who was a royal equerry. And, swelling like the 
fumes of some witches’ vat, those other abominations 


pressed about the couch of Ulua with obscene mouthings 
and fingerings. 

At this, like the mark of a hellish branding, horror was 
printed on the features of the captain and the equerry; 
and a terror rose in the eyes of Ulua like a pale flame 
ignited in sunless pits; and her breasts shuddered beneath 
the breast-cups. And now, in a trice, the mirrored room 
began to rock violently, and the censers were overturned 
on the tilting flags, and the shameless hangings shook and 
bellied like the blown sails of a vessel in storm. Great 
cracks appeared in the floor, and beside the couch of 
Ulua a chasm deepened swiftly and then widened from 
wall to wall. The whole chamber was riven asunder and 
the princess and her two lovers, with all her loathly send 
ings about them, were hurled tumultuously into the 
chasm. 

After that, the mirror darkened, and Amalzain beheld 
for a moment the pale towers of Miraab, tossing and fall 
ing on heavens black as adamant. The mirror itself trem 
bled, and the veiled image of metal supporting it began to 
totter and seemed about to fall; and the wattled house of 
Sabmon shook in the passing earthquake, but, being 
stoutly built, stood firm while the mansions and palaces 
of Miraab went down in ruin. 

When the earth had ceased its long trembling, Sabmon 
issued from the oratory. 

“It is needless to moralize on what has happened,” he 
said. “You have learned the true nature of carnal desire, 
and have likewise beheld the history of mundane corrup 
tion. Now being wise, you will turn early to those things 
which are incorruptible and beyond the world.” 

Thereafter, till the death of Sabmon, Amalzain dwelt 
with him and became his only pupil in the science of the 
stars and the hidden arts of enchantment and sorcery. 

The Charnel God 


Mordiggian is the god of Zul-Bha-Sair,” said the inn 
keeper with unctuous solemnity. “He has been the god from 
years that are lost to man’s memory in shadow deeper 
than the subterranes of his black temple. There is no 
other god in Zul-Bha-Sair. And all who die within the 
walls of the city are sacred to Mordiggian. Even the kings 
and the optimates, at death, are delivered into the hands 
of his muffled priests. It is the law and the custom. A lit 
tle while, and the priests will come for your bride.” 

“But Elaith is not dead,” protested the youth Phariom 
for the third or fourth time, in piteous desperation. “Her 
malady is one that assumes the lying likeness of death. 
Twice before has she lain insensible, with a pallor upon 
her cheeks, and a stillness in her very blood, that could 
hardly be distinguished from those of the tomb; and twice 
she has awakened after an interim of days.” 

The innkeeper peered with an air of ponderous unbe 
lief at the girl who lay white and motionless as a mown 
lily on the bed in the poorly furnished attic chamber. 

“In that case you should not have brought her into 
Zul-Bha-Sair,” he averred in a tone of owlish irony. “The 
physician has pronounced her dead; and her death has 
been reported to the priests. She must go to the temple of 
Mordiggian.” 

“But we are outlanders, guests of a night. We have 
come from the land of Xylac, far in the north; and this 
morning we should have gone on through Tasuun, toward 
Pharaad, the capital of Yoros, which lies near to the 
southern sea. Surely your god could have no claim upon 
Elaith, even if she were truly dead.” 

“All who die in Zul-Bha-Sair are the property of Mor 
diggian,” insisted the taverner sententiously. “Outlanders 


are not exempt. The dark maw of his temple yawns eter 
nally, and no man, no child, no woman, throughout the 
years, has evaded its yawning. All mortal flesh must be 
come, in due time, the provender of the god.” 

Phariom shuddered at the oily and portentous declara 
tion. 

“Dimly have I heard of Mordiggian, as a legend that 
travelers tell in Xylac,” he admitted. “But I had forgotten 
the name of his city; and Elaith and I came ignorantly 
into Zul-Bha-Sair. . . . Even had I known, I should have 
doubted the terrible custom of which you inform me. 
. . . What manner of deity is this, who imitates the hyena 
and the vulture? Surely he is no god, but a ghoul.” 

“Take heed lest you utter blasphemy,” admonished the 
innkeeper. “Mordiggian is old and omnipotent as death. 
He was worshipped in former continents, before the lift 
ing of  from out the sea. Through him, we are 
saved from corruption and the worm. Even as the people 
of other places devote their dead to the consuming flame, 
so we of Zul-Bha-Sair deliver ours to the god. Awful is 
the fane, a place of terror and obscure shadow untrod by 
the sun, into which the dead are borne by his priests and 
are laid on a vast table of stone to await his coming from 
the nether vault in which he dwells. No living men, other 
than the priests, have ever beheld him; and the faces of 
the priests are hidden behind masks of silver, and even 
their hands are shrouded, that men may not gaze on them 
that have seen Mordiggian.” 

“But there is a king in Zul-Bha-Sair, is there not? I 
shall appeal to him against this heinous and horrible in 
justice. Surely he will heed me.” 

“Phenquor is the king; but he could not help you even 
if he wished. Your appeal will not even be heard. Mor 
diggian is above all kings, and his law is sacred. Hark!— 
for already the priests come.” 

Phariom, sick at heart with the charnel terror and 
cruelty of the doom that impended for his girlish wife in 
this unknown city of nightmare, heard an evil, stealthy 
creaking on the stairs that led to the attic of the inn. The 
sound drew nearer with inhuman rapidity, and four 


strange figures came into the room, heavily garbed in 
funereal purple, and wearing huge masks of silver graven 
in the likeness of skulls. It was impossible to surmise their 
actual appearance, for, even as the taverner had hinted, 
their very hands were concealed by fingerless gloves; and 
the purple gowns came down in loose folds that trailed 
about their feet like unwinding cerecloths. There was a 
horror about them, of which the macabre masks were 
only a lesser element; a horror that lay partly in their un 
natural, crouching attitudes, and the beastlike agility with 
which they moved, unhampered by their cumbrous habili 
ments. 

Among them, they carried a curious bier, made from 
interwoven strips of leather, and with monstrous bones 
that served for frame and handles. The leather was greasy 
and blackened as if from long years of mortuary use. 
Without speaking to Phariom or the innkeeper, and with 
no delay or formality of any sort, they advanced toward 
the bed on which Elaith was lying. 

Undeterred by their more than formidable aspect, and 
wholly distraught with grief and anger, Phariom drew 
from his girdle a short knife, the only weapon he pos 
sessed. Disregarding the minatory cry of the taverner, 
he rushed wildly upon the muffled figures. He was quick 
and muscular, and, moreover, was clad in light, close-fit 
ting raiment, such as would seemingly have given him a 
brief advantage. 

The priests had turned their backs upon him; but, as if 
they had foreseen his every action, two of them wheeled 
about with the swiftness of tigers, dropping the handles of 
bone that they carried. One of them struck the knife from 
Phariom’s hand with a movement that the eye could 
barely follow in its snaky darting. Then both assailed 
him, beating him back with terrible flailing blows of their 
shrouded arms, and hurling him half across the room into 
an empty comer. Stunned by his fall, he lay senseless for 
a term of minutes. 

Recovering dazedly, with eyes that blurred as he 
opened them, he beheld the fact of the stout taverner 
stooping above him like a tallow-colored moon. The 


thought of Elaith, more sharp than the thrust of a dagger, 
brought him back to agonizing consciousness. Fearfully 
he scanned the shadowy room, and saw that the cre- 
mented priests were gone, that the bed was vacant. He 
heard the orotund and sepulchral croaking of the taver 
ner. 

“The priests of Mordiggian are merciful, they make al 
lowance for the frenzy and distraction of the newly be 
reaved. It is well for you that they are compassionate, 
and considerate of mortal weakness.” 

Phariom sprang erect, as if his bruised and aching 
body were scorched by a sudden fire. Pausing only to retrieve 
his knife, which still lay in the middle of the room, 
he started toward the door. He was stopped by the hand 
of the hosteler, clutching greasily at his shoulder. 

“Beware, lest you exceed the bounds of the mercy of 
Mordiggian. It is an ill thing to follow his priests—and a 
worse thing to intrude upon the deathly and sacred gloom 
of his temple.” 

Phariom scarcely heard the admonition. He wrenched 
himself hastily away from the odious fingers and turned 
to go; but again the hand clutched him. 

“At least, pay me the money that you owe for food 
and lodging, ere you depart,” demanded the innkeeper. 
“Also, there is the matter of the physician’s fee, which I 
can settle for you, if you will entrust me with the proper 
sum. Pay now—for there is no surety that you will return.” 

Phariom drew out the purse that contained his entire 
worldly wealth, and filled the greedily cupped palm before 
him with coins that he did not pause to count. With no 
parting word or backward glance, he descended the moldy 
and musty stairs of the worm-eaten hostelry, as if spurred 
by an incubus, and went out into the gloomy, serpentine 
streets of Zul-Bha-Sair. 

Perhaps the city differed little from others, except in 
being older and darker; but to Phariom, in his extremity of 
anguish, the ways that he followed were like subterrene 
corridors that led only to some profound and monstrous 
charnel. The sun h

but it seemed to him that there was no light, other than a 
lost and doleful glimmering such as might descend into 
mortuary depths. The people, it may have been, were 
much like other people, but he saw them under a malefic 
aspect, as if they were ghouls and demons that went to and 
fro on the ghastly errands of a necropolis. 

Bitterly, in his distraction, he recalled the previous eve 
ning, when he had entered Zul-Bha-Sair at twilight with 
Elaith, the girl riding on the one dromedary that had sur 
vived their passage of the northern desert, and he walking 
beside her, weary but content. With the rosy purple of af 
terglow upon its walls and cupolas, with the deepening 
golden eyes of its lit windows, the place had seemed a fair 
and nameless city of dreams, and they had planned to rest 
there for a day or two before resuming the long, arduous 
journey to Pharaad, in Yoros. 

This journey had been undertaken only through neces 
sity. Phariom, an impoverished youth of noble blood, had 
been exiled because of the political and religious tenets of 
his family, which were not in accord with those of the 
reigning emperor, Caleppos. Taking his newly wedded 
wife, Phariom had set out for Yoros, where certain allied 
branches of the house to which he belonged had already 
established themselves, and would give him a fraternal 
welcome. 

They had traveled with a large caravan of merchants, 
going directly southward to Tasuun. Beyond the borders 
of Xylac, amid the red sands of the Celotian waste, the 
caravan had been attacked by robbers, who had slain 
many of its members and dispersed the rest. Phariom and 
his bride, escaping with their dromedaries, had found 
themselves lost and alone in the desert, and, failing to regain 
the road toward Tasuun, had taken inadvertently an 
other track, leading to Zul-Bha-Sair, a walled metropolis 
on the southwestern verge of the waste, which their itiner 
ary had not included. 

Entering Zul-Bha-Sair, the couple had repaired for rea 
sons of economy to a tavern in the humbler quarter. 
There, during the night, Elaith had been overcome by the 
third seizure of the cataleptic malady to which she was li- 

able. The earlier seizures, occurring before her marriage to 
Phariom, had been recognized in their true character by 
the physicians of Xylac, and had been palliated by skillful 
treatment. It was hoped that the malady would not recur. 
The third attack, no doubt, had been induced by the 
fatigues and hardships of the journey. Phariom had felt 
sure that Elaith would recover; but a doctor of Zul-Bha- 
Sair, hastily summoned by the innkeeper, had insisted that 
she was actually dead; and, in obedience to the strange law 
of the city, had reported her death without delay to the 
priests of Mordiggian. The frantic protests of the husband 
had been utterly ignored. 

There was, it seemed, a diabolic fatality about the 
whole train of circumstances through which Elaith, still 
living, though with that outward aspect of the tomb which 
her illness involved, had fallen into the grasp of the devotees 
of the charnel god. Phariom pondered this fatality al 
most to madness, as he strode with furious, aimless haste 
along the eternally winding and crowded streets. 

To the cheerless information received from the taver 
ner, he added, as he went on, more and more of the tardily 
remembered legends which he had heard in Xylac. Ill and 
dubious indeed was the renown of Zul-Bha-Sair, and he 
marveled that he should have forgotten it, and cursed him 
self with black curses for the temporary but fatal forgetful 
ness. Better would it have been if he and Elaith had per 
ished in the desert, rather than enter the wide gates that 
stood always open, gaping for their prey, as was the cus 
tom of Zul-Bha-Sair. 

The city was a mart of trade, where outland travelers 
came, but did not care to linger, because of the repulsive 
cult of Mordiggian, the invisible eater of the dead, who 
was believed to share his provender with the shrouded 
priests. It was said that the bodies lay for days in the dark 
temple and were not devoured till corruption had begun. 
And people whispered of fouler things than necrophagism, 
of blashphemous rites that were solemnized in the ghoul- 
ridden vaults, and nameless uses to which the dead were 
put before Mordiggian claimed them. In all outlying 
places, the fate of those who died in Zul-Bha-Sair was a 


dreadful byword and a malediction. But to the people of 
that city, reared in the faith of the ghoulish god, it was 
merely the usual and expected mode of mortuary disposal. 
Tombs, graves, catacombs, funeral pyres, and other such 
nuisances, were rendered needless by this highly utilitarian 
deity. 

Phariom was surprised to see the people of the city 
going about the common businesses of life. Porters were 
passing with bales of household goods upon their shoul 
ders. Merchants were squatting in their shops like other 
merchants. Buyers and sellers chaffered loudly in the 
public bazaars. Women laughed and chattered in the door 
ways. Only by their voluminous robes of red, black and vi 
olet, and their strange, uncouth accents, was he able to 
distinguish the men of Zul-Bha-Sair from those who were 
outlanders like hims elf. The murk of nightmare began to 
lift from his impressions; and gradually, as he went on, the 
spectacle of everyday humanity all about him helped to 
calm a little his wild distraction and desperation. Nothing 
could dissipate the horror of his loss, and the abominable 
fate that threatened Elaith. But now, with a cool logic 
bom of the cruel exigence, he began to consider the appar 
ently hopeless problem of rescuing her from the ghoul- 
god’s temple. 

He composed his features, and constrained his febril 
pacing to an idle saunter, so that none might guess die 
preoccupations that racked him inwardly. Pretending to 
be interested in the wares of a seller of men’s apparel, he 
drew the dealer into converse regarding Zul-Bha-Sair and 
its customs, and made such inquiries as a traveler from 
far lands might make. The dealer was talkative, and 
Phariom soon learned from him the location of the tem 
ple of Mordiggian, which stood at the city’s core. He also 
learned that the temple was open at all hours, and that 
people were free to come and go wi thin its precincts. 
There were, however, no rituals of worship, other than 
certain private rites that were celebrated by the priest 
hood. Few cared to enter the fane, because of a supersti 
tion that any living person who intruded upon its gloom 
would return to it shortly as the provender of the god. 


Mordiggian, it seemed, was a benign deity in the eyes 
of the inhabitants of Zul-Bha-Sair. Curiously enough, no 
definite personal attributes were ascribed to him. He was, 
so to speak, an impersonal force akin to the elements—a 
consuming and cleansing power, like fire. His hierophants 
were equally mysterious; they lived in the temple and 
emerged from it only in the execution of their funeral du 
ties. No one knew the manner of their recruiting, but 
many believed that they were both male and female, thus 
renewing their numbers from generation to generation 
with no ulterior commerce. Others thought that they were 
not human beings at all, but an order of subterranean 
earth-entities, who lived for ever, and who fed upon 
corpses like the god himself. Through this latter belief, of 
late years, a minor heresy had risen, some holding that 
Mordiggian was a mere hieratic figment, and the priests 
were the sole devourers of the dead. The dealer, quoting 
this heresy, made haste to disavow it with pious reproba 
tion. 

Phariom chatted for awhile on other topics, and then 
continued his progress through the city, going as forth 
rightly toward the temple as the obliquely running thor 
oughfares would permit. He had formed no conscious 
plan, but desired to reconnoiter the vicinage. In that 
which the garment-dealer had told him, the one reassur 
ing detail was the openness of the fane and its accessibil 
ity to all who dared enter. The rarity of visitors, however, 
would make Phariom conspicuous, and he wished above 
all to avoid attention. On the other hand, any effort to 
remove bodies from the temple was seemingly unheard of 
—a thing audacious beyond the dreams of die people of 
Zul-Bha-Sair. Through the very boldness of his design, he 
might avoid suspicion, and succeed in rescuing Elaith. 

The streets that he followed began to tend downward, 
and were narrower, dimmer and more tortuous than any 
he had yet traversed. He thought for awhile that he had 
lost his way, and he was about to ask the passers to redi 
rect him, when four of the priests of Mordiggian, bearing 
one of the curious litter-like biers of bone and leather, 
emerged from an ancient alley just before him. 


The bier was occupied by the body of a girl, and for 
one moment of convulsive shock and agitation that left 
him trembling, Phariom thought that the girl was Elaith. 
Looking again, he saw his mistake. The gown that the girl 
wore, though simple, was made of some rare exotic stuff. 
Her features, though pale as those of Elaith, were 
crowned with curls like the petals of heavy black poppies. 
Her beauty, warm and voluptuous even in death, differed 
from the blond pureness of Elaith as tropic lilies differ 
from narcissi. 

Quietly, and maintaining a discreet interval, Phariom 
followed the sullenly shrouded figures and their lovely 
burden. He saw that people made way for the passage of 
the bier with awed, unquestioning alacrity; and the loud 
voices of hucksters and chafferers were hushed as the 
priests went by. Overhearing a murmured conversation 
between two of the townsfolk, he learned that the dead 
girl was Arctela, daughter of Quaos, a high noble and 
magistrate of Zul-Bha-Sair. She had died very quickly 
and mysteriously, from a cause unknown to the physi 
cians, which had not marred or wasted her beauty in the 
least. There were those who held that an indetectable poi 
son, rather than disease, had been the agency of death; 
and others deemed her the victim of malefic sorcery. 

The priests went on, and Phariom kept them in sight as 
well as he could in the blind tangle of streets. The way 
steepened, without affording any clear prospect of the lev 
els below, and the houses seemed to crowd more closely, 
as if huddling back from a precipice. Finally the youth 
emerged behind his macabre guides in a sort of circular 
hollow at the city’s heart, where the temple of Mordiggian 

loomed alone and separate amid pavements of sad onyx, 
and funerary cedars whose green had blackened as if with 
the underparting charnel shadows bequeathed by dead 
ages. 

The edifice was built of a strange stone, hued as with 
the blackish purple of carnal decay: a stone that refused 
the ardent luster of noon, and the prodigality of dawn or 
sunset glory. It was low and windowless, having the form 


of a monstrous mausoleum. Its portals yawned sepul- 
chrally in the gloom of the cedars. 

Phariom watched the priests as they vanished within 
the portals, carrying the girl Arctela like phantoms who 
bear a phantom burden. The broad area of pavement be 
tween the recoiling houses and the temple was now deserted, but he did not venture to cross it in the blare of 
betraying daylight. Circling the area, he saw that there 
were several other entrances to the great fane, all open 
and unguarded. There was no sign of activity about the 
place; but he shuddered at the thought of that which was 
hidden within its walls, even as the feasting of worms is 
hidden in the marble tomb. 

Like a vomiting of charnels, the abominations of which 
he had heard rose up before him in the sunlight; and 
again he drew close to madness, knowing that Elaith must 
lie among the dead, in the temple, with the foul umbrage 
of such things upon her; and that he, consumed with un 
remitting frenzy, must wait for the favorable shrouding of 
darkness before he could execute his nebulous, doubtful 
plan of rescue. In the meanwhile, she might awake, and 
perish from the mortal horror of her surroundings ... or 
worse even than this might befall, if the whispered tales 
were true. . . 

Abnon-Tha, sorcerer and necromancer, was felicitating 
himself on the bargain he had made with the priests of 
Mordiggian. He felt, perhaps justly, that no one less 
clever than he could have conceived and executed the 
various procedures that had made possible this bargain, 
through which Arctela, daughter of the proud Quaos, 
would become his unquestioning slave. No other lover, he 
told himself, could have been resourceful enough to ob 
tain a desired woman in this fashion. Arctela, betrothed 
to Alos, a young noble of the city, was seemingly beyond 
the aspiration of a sorcerer. Abnon-Tha, however, was no 
common hedge-wizard, but an adept of long standing in 
the most awful and profound arcana of the black arts. He 
knew the spells that kill more quickly and surely than 
knife or poison, at a distance; and he knew also the 
darker spells by which the dead can be reanimated, even 


after years or ages of decay. He had slain Arctela in a 
mann er that none could detect, with a rare and subtle 
invultuation that had left no mark; and her body lay now 
among the dead, in Mordiggian’s temple. Tonight, with 
the tacit connivance of the terrible, shrouded priests, he 
would bring her back to life. 

Abnon-Tha was not native to Zul-Bha-Sair, but had 
come many years before from the infamous, half-mythic 
isle of Sotar, lying somewhere to the east of the huge con 
tinent of . Like a sleek young vulture, he had es 
tablished himself in the very shadow of the charnel fane, 
and had prospered, taking to himself pupils and assis 
tants. 

His dealings with the priests were long and extensive, 
and the bargain he had just made was far from being the 
first of its kind. They had allowed him the temporary use 
of bodies claimed by Mordiggian, stipulating only that 
these bodies should not be removed from the temple dur 
ing the course of any of his experiments in necromancy. 
Since the privilege was slightly irregular from their view 
point, he had found it necessary to bribe them—not, 
however, with gold, but with the promise of a liberal pur 
veyance of matters more sinister and corruptible than gold. 
The arrangement had been satisfactory enough to all con 
cerned: cadavers had poured into the temple with more 
than their usual abundance ever since the coming of the 
sorcerer; the god had not lacked for provender; and Ab 
non-Tha had never lacked for subjects on which to em 
ploy his more baleful spells. 

On the whole, Abnon-Tha was not ill-pleased with 
himself. He reflected, moreover, that, aside from his mas 
tery of magic and his sleightful ingenuity, he was about to 
manifest a well-nigh unexampled courage. He had 
planned a robbery that would amount to dire sacrilege: the 
removal of the reanimated body of Arctela from the tem 
ple. Such robberies (either of animate or exanimate 
corpses) and the penalty attached to them, were a matter 
of legend only; for none had occurred in recent ages. 
Thrice terrible, according to common belief, was the 
doom of those who had tried and failed. The necro- 

mancer was not blind to the risks of his enterprise; nor, 
on the other hand, was he deterred or intimidated by 
them. 

His two assistants, Narghai and Vemba-Tsith, apprised 
of his intention, had made with all due privity the neces 
sary preparations for their flight from Zul-Bha-Sair. The 
strong passion that the sorcerer had conceived for Arctela 
was not his only motive, perhaps, in removing from that 
city. He was desirous of change, for he had grown a little 
weary of the odd laws that really served to restrict his nec 
romantic practices, while facilitating them in a sense. He 
planned to travel southward, and establish himself in one 
of the cities of Tasuun, an empire famous for the number 
and antiquity of its mummies. 

It was now sunset-time. Five dromedaries, bred for rac 
ing, waited in the inner courtyard of Abnon-Tha’s house, a 
high and moldering mansion that seemed to lean forward 
upon the open, circular area belonging to the temple. One 
of the dromedaries would carry a bale containing the sor 
cerer’s most valuable books, manuscripts, and other 
impedimenta of magic. Its fellows would bear Abnon- 
Tha, the two assistants—and Arctela. 

Narghai and Vemba-Tsith appeared before their mas 
ter to tell him that all was made ready. Both were much 
younger than Abnon-Tha; but, like himself, they were 
outlanders in Zul-Bha-Sair. They came of the swart and 
narrow-eyed people of Naat, an isle that was little less in 
famous than Sotar. 

“It is well,” said the necromancer, as they stood before 
him with lowered eyes, after making their announcement. 
“We have only to await the favorable hour. Midway be 
tween sunset and moonrise, when the priests are at their 
supper in the nether adytum, we will enter the temple and 
perform that which must be done for the rising of Arctela. 
They feed well tonight, for I know that many of the dead 
grow ripe on the great table in the upper sanctuary; and it 
may be that Mordiggian feeds also. None will come to 
watch us at our doings.” 

“But, master,” said Narghai, shivering a little beneath 
his robe of nacarat red, “is it wise, after all, to do this 

thing? Must you take the girl from the temple? Always, ere 
this, you have contented yourself with the brief loan that 
the priests allow, and have rendered back the dead in the 
required state of exanimation. Truly, is it well to violate 
the law of the god? Men say that the wrath of Mordig- 
gian, though seldom loosed, is more dreadful than the 
wrath of all other deities. For this reason, none has dared 
to defraud him in latter years, or attempt the removal of 
any of the corpses from his fane. Long ago, it is told, a 
high noble of the city bore hence the cadaver of a woman 
he had loved, and fled with it into the desert; but the 
priests pursued him, running more swiftly than jackals 
. . . and the fate that overtook him is a thing whereof the 
legends whisper but dimly.” 

“I fear neither Mordiggian nor his creatures,” said Ab- 
non-Tha, with a solemn vainglory in his voice. “My drom 
edaries can outrun the priests—even granting that the 
priests are not men at all, but ghouls, as some say. And 
there is small likelihood that they will follow us: after 
their feasting tonight, they will sleep like gorged vultures. 
The morrow will find us far on the road to Tasuun, ere 
they awake.” 

“The master is right,” interpolated Vemba-Tsith. “We 
have nothing to fear.” 

“But they say tht Mordiggian does not sleep,” insisted 
Narghai, “and that he watches all things eternally from 
his black vault beneath the temple.” 

“So I have heard,” said Abnon-Tha, with a dry and 
learned air. “But I consider that such beliefs are mere su 
perstition. There is nothing to confirm them in the real 
nature of corpse-eating entities. So far, I have never be 
held Mordiggian, either sleeping or awake; but in all like 
lihood he is merely a common ghoul. I know these demons and their habits. They differ from hyenas only 
through their monstrous shape and size, and their immor 
tality.” 

“Still, I must deem it an ill thing to cheat Mordiggian,” 
muttered Narghai beneath his breath. 

The words were caught by the quick ears of Abnon- 
Tha. “Nay, there is no question of cheating. Well have I 

served Mordiggian and his priesthood, and amply have I 
larded their black table. Also, I shall keep, in a sense, the 
bargain I have made concerning Arctela: the providing 
of a new cadaver in return for my necromantic privilege. 
Tomorrow, the youth Alos, the betrothed of Arctela, will 
lie in her place among the dead. Go now, and leave me, 
for I must devise the inward invultuation that will rot the 
heart of Alos, like a worm that awakens at the core of 
fruit.” 

To Phariom, fevered and distraught, it seemed that the 
cloudless day went by with the sluggishness of a corpse- 
clogged river. Unable to calm his agitation, he wandered 
aimlessly through the thronged bazaars, till the western 
towers grew dark on a heaven of saffron flame, and the 
twilight rose like a gray and curdling sea among the 
houses. Then he returned to the inn where Elaith had 
been stricken, and claimed the dromedary which he had 
left in the tavern stables. Riding the animal through dim 
thoroughfares, lit only by the covert gleam of lamps or 
tapers from half-closed windows, he found his way once 
more to the city’s center. 

The dusk had thickened into darkness when he came 
to the open area surrounding Mordiggian’s temple. The 
windows of mansions fronting the area were shut and 
Jightless as dead eyes, and the fane itself, a colossal bulk of 
gloom, was rayless as any mausoleum beneath the gather 
ing stars. No one, it seemed, was abroad, and though the 
quietude was favorable to his project, Phariom shivered 
with a chill of deathly menace and desolation. The hoofs 
of his camel rang on the pavement with a startling and 
preternatural clangor, and he thought that the ears of hid 
den ghouls, listening alertly behind the silence, must 
surely hear them. 

However, there was no stirring of life in that sepulchral 
gloom. Reaching the shelter of one of the thick groups of 
ancient cedars, he dismounted and tied the dromedary to 
a low-growing branch. Keeping among the trees, like a 
shadow among shadows, he approached the temple with 
infinite wariness, and circled it slowly, finding that its four 

doorways, which corresponded to the four quarters of the 
Earth, were all wide open, deserted, and equally dark. Returning 
at length to the eastern side, on which he had 
tethered his camel, he emboldened himself to enter the 
blackly gaping portals. 

Crossing the threshold, he was engulfed instantly by a 
dead and clammy darkness, touched with the faint fetor 
of corruption, and a smell as of charred bone and flesh. 
He thought that he was in a huge corridor, and feeling his 
way forward along the right-hand wall, he soon came to a 
sudden turn, and saw a bluish glimmering far ahead, as if 
in some central adytum where the hall ended. Massy col 
umns were silhouetted against the glimmering; and across 
it, as he drew nearer, several dark and muffled figures 
passed, presenting the profiles of enormous skulls. Two of 
them were sharing the burden of a human body which they 
carried in their arms. To Phariom, pausing in the shadowy 
hall, it appeared that the vague taint of putrescence upon 
the air grew stronger for a few instants after the figures 
had come and gone. 

They were not succeeded by any others, and the fane 
resumed its mausolean stillness. But the youth waited for 
many minutes, doubtful and trepidant, before venturing 
to go on. An oppression of mortuary mystery thickened 
the air, and stifled him like the noisome effluvia of cata 
combs. His ears became intolerably acute, and he heard a 
dim humming, a sound of deep and viscid voices indistin- 
guishably blent, that appeared to issue from crypts beneath 
the temple. 

Stealing at length to the hall’s end, he peered beyond 
into what was obviously the main sanctuary: a low and 
many-pillared room, whose vastness was but half-revealed 
by the bluish fires that glowed and flickered in numerous 
urnlike vessels borne aloft on slender stelae. 

Phariom hesitated upon that awful threshold, for the 
mingled odors of burnt and decaying flesh were heavier 
on the air, as if he had drawn nearer to their sources; and 
the thick humming seemed to ascend from a dark stair 
way in the floor, beside the left-hand wall. But the room, 
to all appearance, was empty of life, and nothing stirred 


except the wavering lights and shadows. The watcher dis 
cerned the outlines of a vast table in the center, carved 
from the same black stone as the building itself. Upon the 
table, half lit by the flaming urns, or shrouded by the 
umbrage of the heavy columns, a number of people lay 
side by side; and Phariom knew that he had found the 
black altar of Mordiggian, whereon were disposed the 
bodies claimed by the god. 

A wild and stifling fear contended with a wilder hope in 
his bosom. Trembling, he went toward the table; and a 
cold clamminess, wrought by the presence of the dead, 
assailed him. The table was nearly thirty feet in length, 
and it rose waist-high on a dozen mighty legs. Beginning 
at the hearer end, he passed along the row of corpses, 
peering fearfully into each upturned face. Both sexes, and 
many ages and differing ranks were represented. Nobles 
and rich merchants were crowded by beggars in filthy 
rags. Some were newly dead, and others, it seemed, had 
lain there for days, and were beginning to show the marks 
of corruption. There were many gaps in the ordered row, 
suggesting that certain of the corpses had been removed. 
Phariom went on in the dim light, searching for the loved 
features of Elaith. At last, when he was nearing the fur 
ther end, and had begun to fear that she was not among 
them, he found her. 

With the cryptic pallor and stillness of her strange mal 
ady upon her, she lay unchanged on the chill stone. A 
great thankfulness was bom in the heart of Phariom, for 
he felt sure that she was not dead—and that she had not 
awakened at any time to the horrors of the temple. If he 
could bear her away from the hateful purlieus of Zul- 
Bha-Sair without detection, she would recover from her 
death-simulating sickness. 

Cursorily, he noted that another woman was lying be 
side Elaith, and recognized her as the beautiful Arctela, 
whose bearers he had followed almost to the portals of 
the fane. He gave her no second glance, but stooped to 
lift Elaith in his arms. 

At that moment, he heard a murmur of low voices in 
the direction of the door by which he had entered the 

sanctuary. Thinking that some of the priests had returned, 
he dropped swiftly on hands and knees and 
crawled beneath the ponderous table, which afforded the 
only accessible hiding-place. Retreating into shadow be 
yond the glimmering shed from the lofty urns, he waited 
and looked out between the pillar-thick legs. 

The voices grew louder, and he saw the curiously san 
daled feet and shortish robes of three persons who ap 
proached the table of the dead and paused in the very 
spot where he himself had stood a few instants before. 
Who they were, he could not surmise; but their garments 
of light and swarthy red were not the shroudings of Mor- 
diggian’s priests. He was uncertain whether or not they 
had seen him; and crouching in the low space beneath the 
table, he plucked his dagger from its sheath. 

Now he was able to distinguish three voices, one sol 
emn and unctuously imperative, one somewhat guttural 
and growling, and the other shrill and nasal. The accents 
were alien, differing from those of the men of Zul-Bha- 
Sair, and the words were often strange to Phariom. Also, 
much of the converse was inaudible. 

“. . . here ... at the end,” said the solemn voice. 
“Be swift. . . . We have no time to loiter.” 

“Yes, Master,” came the growling voice. “But who is 
this other? . . . Truly, she is very fair.” 

A discussion seemed to take place, in discreetly lowered 
tones. Apparently the owner of the guttural voice was 
urging something that the other two opposed. The listener 
could distinguish only a word or two here and there; but 
he gathered that the name of the first person was Vem- 
ba-Tsith, and that the one who spoke in a nasal shrilling 
was called Narghai. At last, above the others, the grave 
accents of the man addressed only as the Master were 
clearly audible: 

“I do not altogether approve. ... It will delay our departure . . . and the two must ride on one dromedary. 
But take her, Vemba-Tsith, if you can perform the neces 
sary spells unaided. I have no time for a double incanta 
tion. ... It will be a good test of your proficiency.” 

There was a mumbling as of thanks or acknowledg- 


ment from Vemba-Tsith. Then the voice of the Master: 
“Be quiet now and make haste.” To Phariom, wondering 
vaguely and uneasily as to the import of this colloquy, it 
seemed that two of the three men pressed closer to the 
table, as if stooping above the dead. He heard a rustling 
of cloth upon stone, and an instant later, he saw that all 
three were departing among the columns and stelae, in a 
direction opposite to that from which they had entered 
the sanctuary. Two of them carried burdens that glim 
mered palely and indistinctly in the shadows. 

A black horror clutched at the heart of Phariom, for 
all too clearly he surmised the nature of those burdens— 
and the possible identity of one of them. Quickly he 
crawled forth from his hiding-place and saw that Elaith 
was gone from the black table, together with the girl 
Arctela. He saw the vanishing of shadowy figures in the 
gloom that zoned the chamber’s western wall. Whether 
the abductors were ghouls, or worse than ghouls, he 
could not know, but he followed swiftly, forgetful of all 
caution in his concern for Elaith. 

Reaching the wall, he found the mouth of a corridor, 
and plunged into it headlong. Somewhere in the gloom 
ahead, he saw a ruddy glimmering of light. Then he 
heard a sullen, metallic grating; and the glimmer nar 
rowed to a slitlike gleam, as if the door of the chamber 
from which it issued were being closed. 

Following the blind wall, he came to that slit of crim 
son light. A door of darkly tarnished bronze had been left 
ajar, and Phariom peered in on a weird, unholy scene, il 
lumined by the bloodlike flames that flared and soared 
unsteadily from high urns upborne on sable pedestals. 

The room was full of a sensuous luxury that accorded 
strangely with the dull, funereal stone of that temple of 
death. There were couches and carpets of superbly fig 
ured stuffs, vermilion, gold, azure, silver; and jeweled cen 
sers of unknown metals stood in the comers. A low table 
at one side was littered with curious bottles, and occult 
appliances such as might be used in medicine or sorcery. 

Elaith was lying on one of the couches, and near her, 
on a second couch, the body of the girl Arctela had been 


disposed. The abductors, whose faces Phariom now be 
held for the first time, were busying themselves with sin 
gular preparations that mystified him prodigiously. His 
impulse to invade the room was repressed by a sort of 
wonder that held him enthralled and motionless. 

One of the three, a tall, middle-aged man whom he 
identified as the Master, had assembled certain peculiar 
vessels, including a small brazier and a censer, and had 
set them on the floor beside Arctela. The second, a young 
er man with lecherously slitted eyes, had placed similar 
impedimenta before Elaith. The third, who was also 
young and evil of aspect, merely stood and looked on 
with an apprehensive, uneasy air. 

Phariom divined that the men were sorcerers when, 
with a deftness bom of long practice, they lit the censers 
and braziers, and began simultaneously the intonation of 
rhythmically measured words in a strange tongue accom 
panied by the sprinkling, at regular intervals, of black oils 
that fell with a great hissing on the coals in the braziers 
and sent up enormous clouds of pearly smoke. Dark 
threads of vapor serpentined from the censers, interweav 
ing themselves like veins through the dim, misshapen 
figures as of ghostly giants that were formed by the 
lighter fumes. A reek of intolerably acrid balsams filled 
the chamber, assailing and troubling the senses of Phar 
iom, till the scene wavered before him and took on a 
dreamlike vastness, a narcotic distortion. 

The voices of the necromancers mounted and fell as if 
in some unholy paean. Imperious, exigent, they seemed to 
implore the consummation of forbidden blasphemy. Like 
thronging phantoms, writhing and swirling with malignant 
life, the vapors rose about the couches on which lay the 
dead girl and the girl who bore the outward likeness of 
death. 

Then, as the fumes were riven apart in their baleful 
seething, Phariom saw that the pale figure of Elaith had 
stirred like a sleeper who awakens, that she had opened 
her eyes and was lifting a feeble hand from the gorgeous 
couch. The younger necromancer ceased his chanting on 
a sharply broken cadence; but the solemn tones of the 


other still went on, and still there was a spell on the limbs 
and senses of Phariom, making it impossible for him to 
stir. 

Slowly the vapors thinned like a rout of dissolving 
phantoms. The watcher saw that the dead girl, Arctela, 
was rising to her feet like a somnambulist. The chanting 
of Abnon-Tha, standing before her, came sonorously to 
an end. In the awful silence that followed, Phariom heard 
a weak cry from Elaith, and then the jubilant, growling 
voice of Vemba-Tsith, who was stooping above her: 

“Behold, O Abnon-Tha! My spells are swifter than 
yours, for she that I have chosen awakened before 
Arctela!” 

Phariom was released from his thralldom, as if through 
the lifting of an evil enchantment. He flung back the pon 
derous door of darkened bronze, that ground with pro 
testing clangors on its hinges. His dagger drawn, he rushed 
into the room. 

Elaith, her eyes wide with piteous bewilderment, 
turned toward him and made an ineffectual effort to arise 
from the couch. Arctela, mute and submissive before Ab 
non-Tha, appeared to heed nothing but the will of the 
necromancer. She was like a fair and soulless automaton. 
The sorcerers, turning as Phariom entered, sprang back 
with instant agility before his onset, and drew the short, 
cruelly crooked swords which they all carried. Narghai 
struck the knife from Phariom’s fingers with a darting 
blow that shattered its thin blade at the hilt, and Vemba- 
Tsith, his weapon swinging back in a vicious arc, would 
have killed the youth promptly if Abnon-Tha had not in 
tervened and bade him stay. 

Phariom, standing furious but irresolute before the 
lifted swords, was aware of the darkly searching eyes of 
Abnon-Tha, like those of some nyctalopic bird of prey. 

“I would know the meaning of this intrusion,” said the 
necromancer. “Truly, you are bold to enter the temple of 
Mordiggian.” 

“I came to find the girl who lies yonder,” declared 
Phariom. “She is Elaith, my wife, who was claimed un 
justly by the god. But tell me, why have you brought her 



  

to this room from the table of Mordiggian, and what 
manner of men are you, that raise up the dead as you 
have raised this other woman?” 

“I am Abnon-Tha, the necromancer, and these others 
are my pupils, Narghai and Vemba-Tsith. Give thanks to 
Vemba-Tsith, for verily he has brought back your wife 
from the purlieus of the dead with a skill excelling that of 
his master. She awoke ere the incantation was finished!” 

Phariom glared with implacable suspicion at Abnon- 
Tha. “Elaith was not dead, but only as one in trance,” he 
averred. “It was not your pupil’s sorcery that awakened 
her. And verily whether Elaith be dead or living is not a 
matter that should concern any but myself. Permit us to 
depart, for I wish to remove with her from Zul-Bha-Sair, 
in which we are only passing travelers.” 

So speaking, he turned his back on the necromancers, 
and went over to Elaith, who regarded him with dazed 
eyes but uttered his name feebly as he clasped her in his 
arms. 

“Now this is a remarkable coincidence,” purred Ab 
non-Tha. “I and my pupils are also planning to depart 
from Zul-Bha-Sair, and we start this very night. Perhaps 
you will honor us with your company.” 

“I thank you,” said Phariom, curtly. “But I am not 
sure that our roads lie together. Elaith and I would go to 
ward Tasuun.” 

“Now, by the black altar of Mordiggian, that is still 
stranger coincidence, for Tasuun is also our destination. 
We take with us the resurrected girl Arctela, whom I 
have deemed too fair for the charnel god and his ghouls.” 

Phariom divined the dark evil that lay behind the oily, 
mocking speeches of the necromancer. Also, he saw the 
furtive and sinister sign that Abnon-Tha had made to his 
assistants. Weaponless, he could only give a formal assent 
to the sardonic proposal. He knew well that he would not 
be permitted to leave the temple alive, for the narrow 
eyes of Narghai and Vemba-Tsith, regarding him closely, 
were alight with the red lust of murder. 

“Come,” said Abnon-Tha, in a voice of imperious 
command. “It is time to go.” He turned to the still figure 



  

of Arctela and spoke an unknown word. With vacant 
eyes and noctambulistic paces, she followed at his heels 
as he stepped toward the open door. Phariom had helped 
Elaith to her feet, and was whispering words of reassur 
ance in an effort to lull the growing horror and confused 
alarm that he saw in her eyes. She was able to walk, al 
beit slowly and uncertainly. Vemba-Tsith and Narghai 
drew back, motioning that she and Phariom should pre 
cede them; but Phariom, sensing their intent to slay him 
as soon as his back was turned, obeyed unwillingly and 
looked desperately about for something that he could 
seize as a weapon. 

One of the metal braziers, full of smoldering coals, was 
at his very feet. He stooped quickly, lifted it in his hands, 
and turned upon the necromancers. Vemba-Tsith, as he 
had suspected, was prowling toward him with upraised 
sword, and was making ready to strike. Phariom hurled 
the brazier and its glowing contents full in the necro 
mancer’s face, and Vemba-Tsith went down with a terri 
ble, smothered cry. Narghai, snarling ferociously, leapt 
forward to assail the defenseless youth. His scimitar 
gleamed with a wicked luster in the lurid glare of the urns 
as he swung it back for the blow. But the weapon did not 
fall; and Phariom, steeling himself against the impending 
death, became aware that Narghai was staring beyond 
him as if petrified by the vision of some Gorgonian specter. 

As if compelled by another will than his own, the 
youth turned—and saw the thing that had arrested Nar- 
ghai’s blow. Arctela and Abnon-Tha, pausing before the 
open door, were outlined against a colossal shadow that 
was not wrought by anything in the room. It filled the 
portals from side to side, it towered above the lintel—and 
then, swiftly, it became more than a shadow: it was a 
bulk of darkness, black and opaque, that somehow 
blinded the eyes with a strange dazzlement. It seemed to 
suck the flame from the red urns and fill the chamber 
with a chill of utter death and voidness. Its form was that 
of a worm-shapen column, huge as a dragon, its further 
coils still issuing from the gloom of the corridor; but it 
changed from moment to moment, swirling and spinning 

as if alive with the vortical energies of dark eons. Briefly 
it took the semblance of some demoniac giant with eye 
less head and limbless body; and then, leaping and 
spreading like smoky fire, it swept forward into the cham 
ber. 

Abnon-Tha fell back before it, with frantic mumblings 
of malediction or exorcism; but Arctela, pale and slight 
and motionless, remained full in its path, while the thing 
enfolded her and enveloped her with a hungry flaring 
until she was hidden wholly from view. 

Phariom, supporting Elaith, who leaned weakly on his 
shoulder as if about to swoon, was powerless to move. He 
forgot the murderous Narghai, and it seemed that he and 
Elaith were but faint shadows in the presence of embod 
ied death and dissolution. He saw the blackness grow and 
wax with the towering of fed flame as it closed about 
Arctela; and he saw it gleam with eddying hues of somber 
iris, like the spectrum of a sable sun. For an instant, he 
heard a soft and flamelike murmuring. Then, quickly and 
terribly, the thing ebbed from the room. Arctela was 
gone, as if she had dissolved like a phantom on the air. 
Borne on a sudden gust of strangely mingled heat and 
cold, there came an acrid odor, such as would rise from a 
burnt-out funeral pyre. 

“Mordiggian!” shrilled Narghai, in hysteric terror. “It 
was the god Mordiggian! He has taken Arctela!” 

It seemed that his cry was answered by a score of sar 
donic echoes, unhuman as the howling of hyenas, and yet 
articulate, that repeated the name Mordiggian. Into the 
room, from the dark hall, there poured a horde of crea 
tures whose violet robes alone identified them in Phar- 
iom’s eyes as the priests of the ghoul-god. They had removed 
the skull-like masks, revealing heads and faces 
that were half anthropomorphic, half canine, and wholly 
diabolic. Also, they had taken off the fingerless 
gloves. . . . There were at least a dozen of them. Their 
curving talons gleamed in the bloody light like the hooks 
of darkly tarnished metal; their spiky teeth, longer than 
coffin nails, protruded from snarling lips. They closed like 
a ring of jackals on Abnon-Tha and Narghai, driving 



  

them back into the farthest comer. Several others, enter 
ing tardily, fell with a bestial ferocity on Vemba-Tsith, 
who had begun to revive, and was moaning and writhing 
on the floor amid the scattered coals of the brazier. 

They seemed to ignore Phariom and Elaith, who stood 
looking on as if in some baleful trance. But the hindmost, 
ere he joined the assailants of Vemba-Tsith, turned to the 
youthful pair and addressed them in a hoarse, hollow 
voice, like a tomb-reverberate barking: 

“Go, for Mordiggian is a just god, who claims only the 
dead, and has no concern with the living. And we, the 
priests of Mordiggian, deal in our own fashion with those 
who would violate his law by removing the dead from the 
temple.” 

Phariom, with Elaith still leaning on his shoulder, went 
out into the dark hall, hearing a hideous clamor in which 
the screams of men were mingled with a growling as of 
jackals, a laughter as of hyenas. The clamor ceased as 
they entered the blue-lit sanctuary and passed toward the 
outer corridor; and the silence that filled Mordiggian’s 
fane behind them was deep as the silence of the dead on 
the black altar-table. 


The Dark Eidolon 


On ZoTfflQUE, the last continent of Earth, the sun no 
longer shone with the whiteness of its prime, but was dim 
and tarnished as if with a vapor of blood. New stars with 
out number had declared themselves in the heavens, and 
the shadows of the infinite had fallen closer. And out of 
the shadows, the older gods had returned to man: the 
gods forgotten since Hyperborea, since Mu and Posei- 
donis, bearing other names but the same attributes. And 
the elder demons had also returned, battening on the 


fumes of evil sacrifice, and fostering again the primordial 
sorceries. 

Many were necromancers and magicians of , 
and the infamy and marvel of their doings were legended 
everywhere in the latter days. But among them all there 
was none greater than Namirrha, who imposed his black 
yoke on the cities of Xylac, and later, in a proud delirium, deemed himself the veritable peer of Thasaidon, lord 
of Evil. 

Namirrha had built his abode in Ummaos, the chief 
town of Xylac, to which he came from the desert realm 
of Tasuun with the dark renown of his thaumaturgies like 
a cloud of desert storm behind him. And no man knew 
that in coming to Ummaos he returned to the city of his 
birth; for all deemed him a native of Tasuun. Indeed, 
none could have dreamt that the great sorcerer was one 
with the beggar boy, Narthos, an orphan of questionable 
parentage, who had begged his daily bread in the streets 
and bazaars of Ummaos. Wretchedly had he lived, alone 
and despised; and a hatred of the cruel, opulent city grew 
in his heart like a smothered flame that feeds in secret, 
hiding the time when it shall become a conflagration con 
suming all things. 

Bitterer always, through his boyhood and early youth, 
was the spleen and rancor of Narthos toward men. And 
one day the prince Zotulla, a boy but little older than he, 
riding a restive palfrey, came upon him in the square be 
fore the imperial palace; and Narthos implored an alms. 
But Zotulla, scorning his plea, rode arrogantly forward, 
spurring the palfrey; and Narthos was ridden down and 
trampled under its hooves. And afterward, nigh to death 
from the trampling, he lay senseless for many hours, 
while the people passed him by unheeding. And at last, 
regaining his senses, he dragged himself to his hovel; but 
he limped a little thereafter all his days, and the mark of 
one hoof remained like a brand on his body, fading 
never. Later, he left Ummaos and was forgotten quickly 
by its people. Going southward into Tasuun, he lost his 
way in the great desert, and was near to perishing. But 
finally he came to a small oasis, where dwelt the wizard 


Ouphaloc, a hermit who preferred the company of honest 
jackals and hyenas to that of men. And Ouphaloc, seeing 
the great craft and evil in the starveling boy, gave succor 
to Narthos and sheltered him. He dwelt for years with 
Ouphaloc, becoming the wizard’s pupil and the heir of his 
demon-wrested lore. Strange things he learned in that 
hermitage, being fed on fruits and grain that had sprung 
not from the watered earth, and wine that was not the 
juice of terrene grapes. And like Ouphaloc, he became a 
master in devildom and drove his own bond with the 
archfiend Thasaidon. When Ouphaloc died, he took the 
name of Namirrha, and went forth as a mighty sorcerer 
among the wandering peoples and the deep-buried mum 
mies of Tasuun. But never could he forget the miseries of 
his boyhood in Ummaos and the wrong he had endured 
from Zotulla; and year by year he spun over in his 
thoughts the black web of revenge. And his fame grew 
ever darker and vaster, and men feared him in remote 
lands beyond Tasuun. With bated whispers they spoke of 
his deeds in the cities of Yoros, and in Zul-Bha-Sair, the 
abode of the ghoulish deity Mordiggian. And long before 
the coming of Namirrha himself, the people of Ummaos 
knew him as a fabled scourge that was direr than simoom 
or pestilence. 

Now, in the years that followed the going-forth of the 
boy Narthos from Ummaos, Pithaim, the father of Prince 
Zotulla, was slain by the sting of a small adder that had 
crept into his bed for warmth on an autumn night. Some 
said that the adder had been purveyed by Zotulla, but this 
was a thing that no man could verily affirm. After the 
death of Pithaim, Zotulla, being his only son, was em 
peror of Xylac, and ruled evilly from his throne in Um 
maos. Indolent he was, and tyrannic, and full of strange 
luxuries and cruelties; but the people, who were also evil, 
acclaimed him in his turpitude. So he prospered, and the 
lords of Hell and Heaven smote him not. And the red 
suns and ashen moons went westward over Xylac, falling 
into that seldom-voyaged sea, which, if the mariners’ tales 
were true, poured evermore like a swiftening river past 


the infamous isle of Naat, and fell in a worldwide cata 
ract upon nether space from the far, sheer edge of Earth. 

Grosser still he grew, and his sins were as overswollen 
fruits that ripen above a deep abyss. But the winds of 
time blew softly; and the fruits fell not. And Zotulla 
laughed amid his fools and his eunuchs and his lemans; 
and the tale of his luxuries was borne afar, and was told 
by dim outland peoples, as a twin marvel with the bruited 
necromancies of Namirrha. 

It came to pass, in the year of the Hyena and the 
month of the star Canicule, that a great feast was given 
by Zotulla to the inhabitants of Ummaos. Meats that had 
been cooked in exotic spices from Sotar, isle of the east, 
were spread everywhere; and the ardent wines of Yoros 
and Xylac, filled as with subterranean fires, were poured 
inexhaustibly from huge urns for all. The wines awoke a 
furious mirth and a royal madness; and afterward they 
brought a slumber no less profound than the Lethe of the 
tomb. And one by one, as they drank, the revelers fell 
down in the streets, the houses and gardens, as if a plague 
had struck them; and Zotulla slept in his banquet-hall of 
gold and ebony, with his odalisques and chamberlains 
about him. So, in all Ummaos, there was no man or 
woman wakeful at the hour when Sirius began to fall to 
ward the west. 

Thus it was that none saw or heard the coming of Na 
mirrha. But awakening heavily in the latter forenoon, the 
emperor Zotulla heard a confused babble, a troublous 
clamor of voices from such of his eunuchs and women as 
had awakened before him. Inquiring the cause, he was 
told that a strange prodigy had occurred during the night; 
but, being still bemused with wine and slumber, he com 
prehended little enough of its nature, till his favorite con 
cubine, Obexah, led him to the eastern portico of the pal 
ace, from which he could behold the marvel with his own 
eyes. 

Now the palace stood alone at the center of Ummaos, 
and to north, west and south, for wide intervals of dis 
tance, there stretched the imperial gardens, full of su 
perbly arching palms and loftily spiring fountains. But to 


eastward was a broad open area, used as a sort of com 
mon, between the palace and the mansions of high opti- 
mates. And in this space, which had lain wholly vacant at 
eve, a building towered colossal and lordly beneath the 
full-risen sun, with domes like monstrous fungi of stone 
that had come up in the night. And the domes, rearing 
level with those of Zotulla, were builded of death-white 
marble; and the huge fagade, with multicolumned por 
ticoes and deep balconies, was wrought in alternate zones 
of night-black onyx and porphry hued as with dragons* 
blood. And Zotulla swore lewdly, calling with hoarse 
blasphemies on the gods and devils of Xylac; and great 
was his dumfoundment, deeming the marvel a work of 
wizardry. The women gathered about him, crying out 
with shrill cries of awe and terror; and more and more of 
his courtiers, awakening, came to swell the hubbub; and 
the fat castradoes diddered in their cloth-of-gold like im 
mense black jellies in golden basins. But Ziotulla, mindful 
of his dominion as emperor of all Xylac, sought to con 
ceal his own trepidation, saying: 

“Now who is this that has presumed to enter Ummaos 
like a jackal in the dark, and has made his impious den in 
proximity and counterview with my palace? Go forth, and 
inquire the miscreant’s name; but, ere you go, instruct the 
headsman to make sharp his double-handed sword.” 

Then, fearing the emperor’s wrath if they tarried, cer 
tain of the chamberlains went forth unwillingly and ap 
proached the portals of the strange edifice. It seemed that 
the portals were deserted till they drew near, and then, on 
the threshold, there appeared a titanic skeleton, taller 
than any man of earth; and it strode forward to meet 
them with ell-long strides. The skeleton was swathed in a 
loincloth of scarlet silk with a buckle of jet, and it wore a 
black turban, starred with diamonds, whose topmost fold 
ings nearly touched the high lintel. Eyes like flickering 
marsh-fires burned in its deep eye-sockets; and a black 
ened tongue like that of a long-dead man protruded be 
tween its teeth; but otherwise it was clean of flesh, and 
the bones glittered whitely in the sun as it came onward. 

The chamberlains were mute before it, and there was 


no sound except the golden creaking of their girdles, the 
shrill rustling of their silks, as they shook and trembled. 
And the foot-bones of the skeleton clicked sharply on the 
pavement of black onyx as it paused; and the putrefying 
tongue began to quiver between its teeth; and it uttered 
these words in an unctuous, nauseous voice: 

“Return, and tell the emperor Zotulla that Namirrha, 
seer and magician, has come to dwell beside him.” 

Hearing the skeleton speak as if it had been a living 
man, and hearing the dread name of Namirrha as men 
hear the tocsin of doom in some fallen city, the chamber 
lains could stand before it no longer, and they fled with 
ungainly swiftness and bore the message to Zotulla. 

Now, learning who it was that had come to neighbor 
with him in Ummaos, the emperor’s wrath died out like a 
feeble and blustering flame on which the wind of darkness 
had blown; and the vinous purple of his cheeks was mot 
tled with a strange pallor; and he said nothing, but his 
lips mumbled loosely as if in prayer or malediction. And 
the news of Namirrha’s coming passed like the flight of 
evil night birds through all the palace and throughout the 
city, leaving a noisome terror that abode in Ummaos 
thereafter till the end. For Namirrha, through the black 
renown of his thaumaturgies and the frightful entities who 
served him, had become a power that no secular sover 
eign dared dispute; and men feared him everywhere, even 
as they feared the gigantic, shadowy lords of Hell and of 
outer space. And in Ummaos, people said that he had 
come on the desert wind from Tasuun with his under 
lings, even as the pestilence comes, and had reared his 
house in an hour with the aid of devils beside Zotulla’s 
palace. And they said that the foundations of the house 
were laid on the adamantine cope of Hell; and in its 
floors were pits at whose bottom burned the nether fires, 
or stars could be seen as they passed under in lowermost 
night. And the followers of Namirrha were the dead of 
strange kingdoms, the demons of sky and earth and 
abyss, and mad, impious, hybrid things that the sorcerer 
himself had created from forbidden unions. 

Men shunned the neighborhood of his lordly house; 


and in the palace of Zotulla few cared to approach the 
windows and balconies that gave thereon; and the em 
peror himself spoke not of Namirrha, pretending to 
ignore the intruder; and the women of the harem babbled 
evermore with an evil gossip concerning Namirrha and 
his concubines. But the sorcerer himself was not beheld 
by the people of the city, though some believed that he 
walked forth at will, clad with invisibility. His servitors 
likewise were not seen; but a howling as of the damned 
was sometimes heard to issue from his portals; and some 
times there came a stony cachinnation, as if some ada 
mantine image had laughed aloud; and sometimes there 
was a chuckling like the sound of shattered ice in a frozen 
hell. Dim shadows moved in the porticoes when there was 
neither sunlight nor lamp to cast them; and red, eery 
lights appeared and vanished in the windows at eve, like 
a blinking of demoniac eyes. And slowly the ember-col 
ored suns went over Xylac, and were quenched in far 
seas; and the ashy moons were blackened as they fell 
nightly toward the hidden gulf. Then, seeing that the wiz 
ard had wrought no open evil, and that none had endured 
palpable harm from his presence, the people took heart; 
and Zotulla drank deeply, and feasted in oblivious luxury 
as before; and dark Thasaidon, prince of all turpitudes, 
was the true but never acknowledged lord of Xylac. And 
in time the men of Ummaos bragged a little of Namirrha 
and his dread thaumaturgies, even as they had boasted of 
the purple sins of Zotulla. 

But Namirrha, still unbeheld by living men and living 
women, sat in the inner halls of that house which his dev 
ils had reared for him, and spun over and over in his 
thoughts the black web of revenge. And in all Ummaos 
there was none,, even among his fellow-beggars, who recalled 
the beggar boy Narthos. And the wrong done by 
Zotulla to Narthos in old time was the least of those 
cruelties which the emperor had forgotten. 

Now, when the fears of Zotulla were somewhat lulled, 
and his women gossiped less often of the neighboring wiz 
ard, there occurred a new wonder and a fresh terror. For, 

sitting one eve at his banquet table with his courtiers 
about him, the emperor heard a noise as of myriad iron- 
shod hooves that came trampling through the palace gardens. 
And the courtiers also heard the sound, and were 
startled amid their mounting drunkenness; and the em 
peror was angered, and he sent certain of his guards to ex 
amine into the cause of the trampling. But peering forth 
upon the moon-bright lawns and parterres, the guards be 
held no visible shape, though the loud sounds of tram 
pling still went to and fro. It seemed as if a rout of wild 
stallions passed and repassed before the fagade of the pal 
ace with tumultuous gallopings and capricoles. And a fear 
came upon the guards as they looked and listened; and 
they dared not venture forth, but returned to Zotulla. 
And the emperor himself grew sober when he heard their 
tale; and he went forth with high blusterings to view the 
prodigy. And all night the unseen hooves rang out sono 
rously on the pavements of onyx, and ran with deep 
thuddings over the grasses and flowers. The palm fronds 
waved on the windless air as if parted by racing steeds; 
and visibly the tall-stemmed lilies and broad-petaled ex 
otic blossoms were trodden under. And rage and terror 
nested together in Zotulla’s heart as he stood in a balcony 
above the garden, hearing the spectral tumult, and be 
holding the harm done to his rarest flower beds. The 
women, the courtiers and eunuchs cowered behind him, 
and there was no slumber for any occupant of the palace; 
but toward dawn the clamor of hooves departed, going 
toward Namirrha’s house. 

When the dawn was full-grown above Ummaos, the 
emperor walked forth with his guards about him, and saw 
that the crushed grasses and broken-down stems were 
blackened as if by fire where the hooves had fallen. 
Plainly were the marks imprinted, like the tracks of a 
great company of horses, in all the lawns and parterres; 
but they ceased at the verge of the gardens. And though 
everyone believed that the visitation had come from Na- 
mirrha, there was no proof of this in the grounds that 
fronted the sorcerer’s abode; for here the turf was untrod 
den. 

“A pox upon Namirrha, if he has done this!” cried Zo- 
tulla. “For what harm have I ever done to him? Verily, I 
shall set my heel on the dog’s neck; and the torture-wheel 
shall serve him even as these horses from Hell have 
served my blood-red lilies of Sotar and my vein-colored 
irises of Naat and my orchids from Uccastrog which were 
purple as the bruises of love. Yea, though he stand the 
viceroy of Thasaidon above Earth, and overlord of ten 
thousand devils, my wheel shall break him, and fires stiall 
heat the wheel white-hot in its turning, till he withers 
black as the seared blossoms.” Thus did Zotulla make his 
brag; but he issued no orders for the execution of the 
threat; and no man stirred from the palace toward Na- 
mirrha’s house. And from the portals of the wizard none 
came forth; or if any came, there was no visible sign or 
sound. 

So the day went over, and the night rose, bringing later 
a moon that was slightly darkened at the rim. And the 
night was silent; and Zotulla, sitting long at the banquet 
table, drained his wine-cup often and wrathfully, mutter 
ing new threats against Namirrha. And the night wore on, 
and it seemed that the visitation would not be repeated. 
But at midnight, lying in his chamber with Obexah, and 
fathom-deep in slumber from his wine, Zotulla was awak 
ened by a monstrous clangor of hooves that raced and ca 
pered in the palace porticoes and in the long balconies. 
All night the hooves thundered back and forth, echoing 
awfully in the vaulted stone, while Zotulla and Obexah, 
listening, huddled close amid their cushions and coverlets; 
and all the occupants of the palace, wakeful and fearful, 
heard the noise but stirred not from their chambers. A lit 
tle before dawn the hooves departed suddenly; and after 
ward, by day, their marks were found on the marble flags 
of the porches and balconies; and the marks were count 
less, deep graven, and black as if branded there by flame. 

Like mottled marble were the emperor’s cheeks when 
he saw the hoof-printed floors and terror stayed with him 
henceforward, following him to the depths of his ine 
briety, since he knew not where the haunting would 
cease. His women murmured and some wished to flee 

from Ummaos, and it seemed that the revels of the day 
and evening were shadowed by ill wings that left their 
umbrage in the yellow wind and bedimmed the aureate 
lamps. And again, toward midnight, the slumber of Zo- 
tulla was broken by the hooves, which came galloping 
and pacing on the palace roof and through all the corri 
dors and halls. Thereafter, till dawn, the hooves filled the 
palace with their iron clatterings, and they rang hollowly 
on the topmost domes, as if the coursers of gods had 
trodden there, passing from heaven to heaven in tumul 
tuous cavalcade. 

Zotulla and Obexah, lying together while the terrible 
hooves went to and fro in the hall outside their chamber, 
had no heart or thought for sin, nor could they find any 
comfort in their nearness. In the gray hour before dawn 
they heard a great thundering high on the barred brazen 
door of the room, as if some mighty stallion, rearing, had 
drummed there with his forefeet. And soon after this, the 
hooves went away, leaving a silence like an interlude in 
some gathering storm of doom. Later, the marks of the 
hooves were found everywhere in the halls, marring the 
bright mosaics. Black holes were burnt in the golden- 
threaded rugs and the rugs of silver and scarlet; and the 
high white domes were pitted pox-wise with' the marks; 
and far up on the brazen door of Zotilla’s chamber the 
prints of a horse’s forefeet were incised deeply. 

Now, in Ummaos, and throughout Xylac, the tale of 
this haunting became known, and the thing was deemed 
an ominous prodigy, though people differed in their in 
terpretations. Some held that the sending came from Na- 
mirrha, and was meant as .a token of his supremacy 
above all kings and emperors; and some thought that it 
came from a new wizard who had risen in Tinarath, far 
to the east, and who wished to supplant Namirrha. And 
the priests of the gods of Xylac held that their various 
deities had dispatched the haunting, as a sign that more 
sacrifices were required in the temples. 

Then, in his hall of audience, whose floor of sard and 
jasper had been grievously pocked by the unseen hooves, 
Zotulla called together many priests and magicians and 



  

soothsayers, and asked them to declare the cause of the 
sending and devise a mode of exorcism. But, seeing that 
there was no agreement among them, Zotulla provided 
the several priestly sects with the wherewithal of sacrifice 
to their sundry gods, and sent them away; and the wiz 
ards and prophets, under threat of decapitation if they refused, 
were enjoined to visit Namirrha in his mansion of 
sorcery and learn at his will, if haply the sending were his 
and not the work of another. 

Loth were the wizards and the soothsayers, fearing Na 
mirrha, and caring not to intrude upon the frightful mys 
teries of his obscure mansion. But the swordsmen of the 
emperor drove them forth, lifting great crescent blades 
against them when they tarried; so one by one, in a strag 
gling order, the delegation went toward Namirrha’s por 
tals and vanished into the devil-builded house. 

Pale, muttering and distraught, like men who have 
looked upon hell and have seen their doom, they returned 
before sunset to the emperor. And they said that Namir 
rha had received them courteously and had sent them 
back with this message: 

“Be it known to Zotulla that the haunting is a sign of 
that which he has long forgotten; and the reason of the 
haunting will be revealed to him at the hour prepared and 
set apart by destiny. And the hour draws near: for Na 
mirrha bids the emperor and all his court to a great feast 
on the afternoon of the morrow.” 

Having delivered this message, to the wonder and con 
sternation of Zotulla, the delegation begged his leave to 
depart. And though the emperor questioned them mi 
nutely, they seemed unwilling to relate the circumstances 
of their visit to Namirrha; nor would they describe the 
sorcerer’s fabled house, except in a vague manner, each 
contradicting the other as to what he had seen. So, after a 
little, Zotulla bade them go, and when they had gone he 
sat musing for a long while on the invitation of Namirrha, 
which was a thing that he cared not to accept but feared 
to decline. That evening he drank even more liberally 
than was his wont; and he slept a Lethean slumber, nor 
was there any noise of trampling hooves about the palace 



  

to awaken him. And silently, during the night, the proph 
ets and the magicians passed like furtive shadows from 
Ummaos; and no man saw them depart; and at morning 
they were gone from Xylac into other lands, never to 
return . . . 

Now, on that same evening, in the great hall of his 
house, Namirrha sat alone, having dismissed the familiars 
who attended him ordinarily. Before him, on an altar of 
jet, was the dark, gigantic statue of Thasaidon which a 
devil-begotten sculptor had wrought in ancient days for 
an evil king of Tasuun, called Phamoc. The archdemon 
was depicted in the guise of a full-armored warrior, lifting 
a spiky mace as if in heroic battle. Long had the statue 
lain in the desert-sunken palace of Phamoc, whose very 
site was disputed by the nomads; and Namirrha, by his 
divination, had found it and had reared up the infernal 
image to abide with him always thereafter. And often, 
through the mouth of the statue, Thasaidon would utter 
oracles to Namirrha, or would answer interrogations. 

Before the black-armored image there hung seven sil 
ver lamps, wrought in the form of horses’ skulls, with 
flames issuing changeably in blue and purple and crimson 
from their eye-sockets. Wild and lurid was their light, and 
the face of the demon, peering from under his crested 
helmet, was filled with malign, equivocal shadows that 
shifted and changed eternally. And sitting in his serpent- 
carven chair, Namirrha regarded the statue grimly, with a 
deep-furrowed frown between his eyes: for he had asked 
a certain thing of Thasaidon, and the fiend, replying 
through the statue, had refused him. And rebellion was in 
the heart of Namirrha, grown mad with pride, and deem 
ing himself the lord of all sorcerers and a ruler by his 
own right among the princes of devildom. So, after long 
pondering, he repeated his request in a bold and haughty 
voice, like one who addresses an equal rather than the 
all-formidable suzerain to whom he has sworn a fatal 
fealty. 

“I have helped you heretofore in all things,” said the 
image, with stony and sonorous accents that were echoed 
metallically in the seven silver lamps. “Yea, the undying 



  

worms of fire and darkness have come forth like an army 
at your summons, and the wings of nether genii have 
risen to occlude the sun when you called them. But, ve 
rily, I will not aid you in this vengeance you have 
planned: for the emperor Zotulla has done me no wrong 
and has served me well though unwittingly; and the peo 
ple of Xylac, by reason of their turpitudes, are not the 
least of my terrestrial worshippers. Therefore, Namirrha, 
it were well for you to live in peace with Zotulla, and well 
to forget this olden wrong that was done to the beggar 
boy Narthos. For the ways of destiny are strange, and the 
workings of its laws are sometimes hidden; and truly, if 
the hooves of Zotulla’s palfrey had not spumed you and 
trodden you under, your life had been otherwise, and the 
name and renown of Namirrha had still slept in oblivion 
as a dream undreamed. Yea, you would tarry still as a 
beggar in Ummaos, content with a beggar’s guerdon, and 
would never have fared forth to become the pupil of the 
wise and learned Ouphaloc; and I, Thasaidon, would 
have lost the lordliest of all necromancers who have ac 
cepted my service and my bond. Think well, Namirrha, 
and ponder these matters: for both of us, it would seem, 
are indebted to Zotulla in all gratitude for the trampling 
that he gave you.” 

“Yea, there is a debt,” Namirrha growled implacably. 
“And truly, I will pay the debt tomorrow, even as I have 
planned. . . . There are Those who will aid me, Those 
who will answer my summoning in your despite.” 

“It is an ill thing to affront me,” said the image, after 
an interval. “And also it is not well to call upon Those 
that you designate. However, I perceive clearly that such 
is your intent. You are proud and stubborn and revenge 
ful. Do, then, as you will, but blame me not for the out 
come.” 

So, after this, there was silence in the hall where Na 
mirrha sat before the eidolon; and the flames burned 
darkly, with changeable colors, in the skull-shapen lamps; 
and the shadows fled and returned, unresting, on the face 
of the statue and the face of Namirrha. Then, toward 
midnight, the necromancer rose and went upward by 



  

many spiral stairs to a high dome of his house in which 
was a single small round window that looked forth on the 
constellations. The window was set in the top of the 
dome; but Namirrha had contrived, by means of his 
magic, that one entering by the last spiral of the stairs 
would suddenly seem to descend rather than climb, and, 
reaching the final step, would peer downward through the 
window while stars passed under him in a giddying gulf. 
There, kneeling, Namirrha touched a secret spring in the 
marble, and the circular pane slid back without sound. 
Then, lying prone on the curved interior of the dome, 
with his face over the abyss, and his long beard trailing 
stiffly into space, he whispered a prehuman rune, and 
held speech with certain entities who belonged neither to 
Hell nor the mundane elements, and were more fearsome 
to invoke than the infernal genii or the devils of earth, 
air, water, and flame. With them he made his compact, 
defying Thasaidon’s will, while the air curdled about him 
with their voices, and rime gathered palely on his sable 
beard from the cold that was wrought by their breathing 
as they leaned earthward. 

Laggard and loth was the awakening of Zotulla from 
his wine; and quickly, ere he opened his eyes, the daylight 
was poisioned for him by the thought of that invitation 
which he feared to accept or decline. But he spoke to Ob- 
exah, saying: 

“Who, after all, is this wizardly dog, that I should obey 
his summons like a beggar called in from the street by 
some haughty lord?” 

Obexah, a golden-skinned and oblique-eyed girl from 
Uccastrog, Isle of the Torturers, eyed the emperor subtly, 
and said: 

“O Zotulla, it is yours to accept or refuse, as you deem 
fitting. And truly, it is a small matter for the lord of Um- 
maos and all Xylac, whether to go or stay, since naught 
can impugn your sovereignty. Therefore, were it not as 
well to go?” For Obexah, though fearful of the wizard, 
was curious regarding that devil-builded house of which 
so little was known; and likewise, in the manner of 



  

women, she wished to behold the famed Namirrha, whose 
mien and appearance were still but a far-brought legend 
in Ummaos. 

“There is something in what you say,” admitted Zo- 
tulla. “But an emperor, in his conduct, must always con 
sider the public good; and there are matters of state in 
volved, which a woman can scarcely be expected to un 
derstand.” 

So, later in the forenoon, after an ample and well-irri 
gated breakfast, he called his chamberlains and courtiers 
about him and took counsel with them. And some ad 
vised him to ignore the invitation of Namirrha; and others 
held that the invitation should be accepted, lest a graver 
evil than the trampling of ghostly hooves should be sent 
upon the palace and the city. 

Then Zotulla called the many priesthoods before him 
in a body, and sought to resummon those wizards and 
soothsayers who had fled privily in the night. Among all 
the latter, there was none who answered the crying of his 
name through Ummaos; and this aroused a certain won 
der. But the priests came in greater number than before, 
and thronged the hall of audience so that the paunches of 
the foremost were straitened against the imperial dais and 
the buttocks of the hindmost were flattened on the rear 
walls and pillars. And Zotulla debated with them the mat 
ter of acceptance or refusal. And the priests argued, as 
before, that Namirrha was nowise concerned with the 
sending; and his invitation, they said, portended no harm 
nor bale to the emperor; and it was plain, from the terms 
of the message, that an oracle would be imparted to Zo 
tulla by the wizard; and this oracle, if Namirrha were a 
true archimage, would confirm their own holy wisdom 
and reestablish the divine source of the sending; and the 
gods of Xylac would again be glorified. 

Then, having heard the pronouncement of the priests, 
the emperor instructed his treasurers to load them down 
with new offerings; and, calling unctuously upon Zotulla 
and all his household the vicarious blessings of their sev 
eral gods, the priests departed. And the day wore on, and 
the sun passed its meridian, falling slowly beyond Um- 



  

maos through the spaces of afternoon that were floored 
with sea-ending deserts. And still Zotulla was irresolute; 
and he called his wine-bearers, bidding them pour for 
him the strongest and most magistral of their vintages; 
but in the wine he found neither certitude nor decision. 

Sitting still on his throne in the hall of audience, he 
heard, toward middle afternoon, a mighty and clamorous 
outcry that arose at the palace portals. There were deep 
wailings of men and the shrillings of eunuchs and women, 
as if terror passed from tongue to tongue, invading the 
halls and apartments. And the fearful clamor spread 
throughout all the palace, and Zotulla, rousing from the 
lethargy of wine, was about to send his attendants to in 
quire the cause. 

Then, into the hall, there filed an array of tall mum 
mies, clad in royal cerements of purple and scarlet, and 
wearing gold crowns on their withered craniums. And 
after them, like servitors, came gigantic skeletons who 
wore loincloths of nacarat orange and about whose upper 
skulls, from brow to crown, live serpents of banded 
saffron and ebon had wrapped themselves for head 
dresses. And the mummies bowed before Zotulla, saying 
with thin, sere voices: 

“We who were kings of the wide realm of Tasuun 
aforetime, have been sent as a guard of honor for the em 
peror Zotulla, to attend him as is befitting when he goes 
forth to the feast prepared by Namirrha.” 

Then with dry clickings of their teeth, and whistlings as 
of air through screens of fretted ivory, the skeletons 
spoke: 

“We, who were giant warriors of a race forgotten, have 
also been sent by Namirrha, so that the emperor’s house 
hold, following him to the feast, should be guarded from 
all peril and should fare forth in such pageantry as is 
meet and proper.” 

Witnessing these prodigies, the wine-bearers and other 
attendants cowered about the imperial dais or hid behind 
the pillars, while Zotulla, with pupils swimming starkly in 
a bloodshot white, with face bloated and ghastly pale, sat 



  

frozen on his throne and could utter no word in reply to 
the ministers of Namirrha. 

Then, coming forward, the mummies said in dusty ac 
cents: “All is made ready, and the feast awaits the arrival 
of Zotulla.” And the cerements of the mummies stirred 
and fell open at the bosom, and small rodent monsters, 
brown as bitumen, eyed as with accursed rubies, reared 
forth from the eaten hearts of the mummies like rats from 
their holes and chittered shrilly in human speech, repeat 
ing the words. The skeletons in turn took up the solemn 
sentence; and the black and saffron serpents hissed it 
from their skulls; and the words were repeated lastly in 
baleful rumblings by certain furry creatures of dubious 
form, hitherto unseen by Zotulla, who sat behind the ribs 
of the skeletons as if in cages of white wicker. 

Like a dreamer who obeys the doom of dreams, the 
emperor rose from his throne and went forward, and the 
mummies surrounded him like an escort. And each of the 
skeletons drew from the reddish-yellow folds of his loin 
cloth a curiously pierced archaic flute of silver; and all 
began a sweet and evil and deathly fluting as the emperor 
went out through the halls of the palace. A fatal spell was 
in the music: for the chamberlains, the women, the 
guards, the eunuchs, and all members of Zotulla’s house 
hold even to the cooks and scullions, were drawn like a 
procession of nightwalkers from the rooms and alcoves in 
which they had vainly hidden themselves; and, marshaled 
by the flutists, they followed after Zotulla. A strange thing 
it was to behold this mighty company of people going 
forth in the slanted sunlight toward Namirrha’s house, 
with a cortege of dead kings about them, and the blown 
breath of skeletons thrilling eldritchly in the silver flutes. 
And little was Zotulla comforted when he found the girl 
Obexah at his side, moving, as he, in a thralldom of invo- 
litient horror, with the rest of his women close behind. 

Coming to the open portals of Namirrha’s house, the 
emperor saw that they were guarded by great crimson- 
wattled things, half dragon, half man, who bowed before 
him, sweeping their wattles like bloody besoms on the 



  

flags of dark onyx. And the emperor passed with Obexah 
between the touting monsters, with the mummies, the 
skeletons and his own people behind him in strange pa 
geant, and entered a vast and multicolumned hall, where 
the daylight following timidly, was drowned by the baleful 
arrogant blaze of a thousand lamps. 

Even amid his horror, Zotulla marveled at the vastness 
of the chamber, which he could hardly reconcile with the 
mansion’s outer length and height and breadth, though 
these indeed were of most palatial amplitude. For it 
seemed that he gazed down great avenues of topless pil 
lars, and vistas of tables laden with piled-up viands and 
thronged urns of wine, that stretched away before him 
into luminous distance and gloom as of starless night. 

In the wide intervals between the tables, the familiars 
of Namirrha and his other servants went to and fro inces 
santly, as if a phantasmagoria of ill dreams were embod 
ied before the emperor. Kingly cadavers in robes of 
time-rotten brocade, with worms seething in their eye- 
pits, poured a bloodlike wine into cups of the opalescent 
horn of unicorns. Lamias, trident-tailed, and four 
breasted chimeras, came in with fuming platters lifted 
high by their brazen claws. Dog-headed devils, tongued 
with tolling flames, ran forward to offer themselves as 
ushers for the company. And before Zotulla and Obexah, 
there appeared a curious being with the full-fleshed lower 
limbs and hips of a great black woman and the clean- 
picked bones of some titanic ape from thereupward. And 
this monster signified by certain indescribable becks of its 
finger-bones that the emperor and his odalisque were to 
follow it. 

Verily, it seemed to Zotulla that they had gone a tong 
way into some malignly litten cavern of Hell, when they 
came to the end of that perspective of tables and columns 
down which the monster had led them. Here, at the 
room’s end, apart from the rest, was a table at which Na 
mirrha sat alone, with the flames of the seven horse-skull 
lamps burning restlessly behind him, and the mailed black 
image of Thasaidon towering from the altar of jet at his 



  

right hand. And a little aside from the altar, a diamond 
mirror was upborne by the claws of iron basilisks. 

Namirrha rose to greet them, observing a solemn and 
funereal courtesy. His eyes were bleak and cold as distant 
stars in the hollows wrought by strange fearful vigils. His 
lips were like a pale-red seal on a shut parchment of 
doom. His beard flowed stiffly in black-anointed banded 
locks across the bosom of his vermilion robe, like a mass 
of straight black serpents. Zotulla felt the blood pause 
and thicken about his heart, as if congealing into ice. And 
Obexah, peering beneath lowered lids, was abashed and 
frightened by the visible horror that invested this man 
and hung upon him even as royalty upon a king. But 
amid her fear, she found room to wonder what manner of 
man he was in his intercourse with women. 

“I bid you welcome, O Zotulla, to such hospitality as 
is mine to offer,” said Namirrha, with the iron ringing of 
some hidden funereal bell deep down in his hollow voice. 
“Prithee, be seated at my table.” 

Zotulla saw that a chair of ebony had been placed for 
him opposite Namirrha; and another chair, less stately 
and imperial, had been placed at the left hand for Ob 
exah. And the twain seated themselves; and Zotulla saw 
that his people were sitting likewise at other tables 
throughout the huge hall, with the frightful servitors of 
Namirrha waiting upon them busily, like devils attending 
the damned. 

Then Zotulla perceived that a dark and corpselike 
hand was pouring wine for him in a crystal 1 cup; and 
upon the hand was the signet ring of the emperors of 
Xylac, set with a monstrous fire-opal in the mouth of a 
golden bat: even such a ring as Zotulla himself wore per 
petually on his index finger. And, turning, he beheld at 
his right hand a figure that bore the likeness of his father, 
Pithaim, after the poison of the adder, spreading through 
all his limbs, had left behind it the purple bloating of 
death. And Zotulla, who had caused the adder to be 
placed in the bed of Pithaim, cowered in his seat and 
trembled with a guilty fear. And the thing that wore the 
similitude of Pithaim, whether corpse or ghost or an 



  

image wrought by Namirrha’s enchantment, came and 
went at Zotulla’s elbow, waiting upon him with stark, 
black, swollen fingers that never fumbled. Horribly he 
was aware of its bulging, unregarding eyes, and its livid 
purple mouth that was locked in a rigor of mortal silence, 
and the spotted adder that peered at intervals with chill 
orbs from its heavy-folded sleeve as it leaned beside him 
to replenish his cup or to serve him with meat. And 
dimly, through the icy mist of his terror, the emperor be 
held the shadowy-armored shape, like a moving replica of 
the still, grim statue of Thasaidon, which Namirrha had 
reared up in his blasphemy to perform the same office for 
himself. And vaguely, without comprehension, he saw the 
dreadful ministrant that hovered beside Obexah: a flayed 
and eyeless corpse in the image of her first lover, a boy 
from Cyntrom who had been cast ashore in shipwreck on 
the Isle of the Torturers. There Obexah had found him, 
lying beyond the ebbing wave; and reviving the boy, she 
had hidden him awhile in a secret cave for her own plea 
sure, and had brought him food and drink. Later, weary 
ing, she had betrayed him to the Torturers, and had taken 
a new delight in the various pangs and ordeals inflicted 
upon him before death by that cruel, pernicious people. 

"Drink,” said Namirrha, quaffing a strange wine that 
was red and dark as if with disastrous sunsets of lost 
years. And Zotulla and Obexah drank the wine, feeling 
no warmth in their veins thereafter, but a chill as of hem 
lock mounting slowly toward the heart. 

"Verily, ’tis a good wine,” said Namirrha, "and a 
proper one in which to toast the furthering of our ac 
quaintance: for it was buried long ago with the royal 
dead, in amphorae of somber jasper shapen like funeral 
urns; and my ghouls found it, whenas they came to dig in 
Tasuun.” 

Now it seemed that the tongue of Zotulla froze in his 
mouth, as a mandrake freezes in the rime-bound soil of 
winter; and he found no reply to Namirrha’s courtesy. 

"Prithee, make trial of this meat,” quoth Namirrha, 
"for it is very choice, being the flesh of that boar which 
the Torturers of Uccastrog are wont to pasture on the 



  

well-minced leavings of their wheels and racks; and, 
moreover, my cooks have spiced it with the powerful bal 
sams of the tomb, and have farced it with the hearts of 
adders and the tongues of black cobras.” 

Naught could the emperor say; and even Obexah was 
silent, being sorely troubled in her turpitude by the pres 
ence of that flayed and piteous thing which had the like 
ness of her lover from Cyntrom. And her dread of the 
necromancer grew prodigiously; for his knowledge of this 
old, forgotten crime, and the raising of the fantasm, ap 
peared to her a more baleful magic than all else. 

“Now, I fear,” said Namirrha, “that you find the meat 
devoid of savor, and the wine without fire. So, to enliven 
our feasting, I shall call forth my singers and my mu- 
sicans.” 

He spoke a word unknown to Zotulla or Obexah, 
which sounded throughout the mighty hall as if a thou 
sand voices in turn had taken it up and prolonged it. 
Anon there appeared the singers, who were she-ghouls 
with shaven bodies and hairy shanks, and long yellow 
tushes full of shredded carrion curving across their chaps 
from mouths that fawned hyena-wise on the company. 
Behind them entered the musicians some of whom were 
male devils pacing erect on the hindquarters of sable stal 
lions and plucking with the fingers of white apes at lyres 
of the bone and sinew of cannibals from Naat; and others 
were pied satyrs puffing their goatish cheeks at hautboys 
made from the femora of young witches, or bagpipes 
formed from the bosom-skin of Negro queens and the 
horn of rhinoceri. 

They bowed before Namirrha with grotesque cere 
mony. Then, without delay, the she-ghouls began a most 
dolorous and execrable howling, as of jackals that have 
sniffed their carrion; and the satyrs and devils played a 
lament that was like the moaning of desert-bom winds 
through forsaken palace harems. And Zotulla shivered, 
for the singing filled his marrow with ice, and the music 
left in his heart a desolation as of empires fallen and trod 
under by the iron-shod hooves of time. Ever, amid that 
evil music, he seemed to hear the sifting of sand across 



  

withered gardens, and the windy rustling of rotted silks 
upon couches of bygone luxury, and the hissing of coiled 
serpents from the low fusts of shattered columns. And the 
glory that had been Ummaos seemed to pass away like the 
blown pillars of the simoom. 

“Now that was a brave tune,” said Namirrha when the 
music ceased and the she-ghouls no longer howled. “But 
verily I fear that you find my entertainment somewhat 
dull. Therefore, my dancers shall dance for you.” 

He turned toward the great hall, and described in the 
air an enigmatic sign with the fingers of his right hand. In 
answer to the sign, a hueless mist came down from the 
high roof and hid the room like a fallen curtain for a 
brief interim. There was a babel of sounds, confused and 
muffled, beyond the curtain, and a crying of voices faint 
as if with distance. 

Then, dreadfully, the vapor rolled away, and Zotulla 
saw that the laden tables were gone. In the wide inter 
spaces of the columns, his palace inmates, the chamber 
lains, the eunuchs, the courtiers and odalisques and all 
the others, lay trussed with thongs on the floor, like so 
many fowls of gorgeous plumage. Above them, in time to 
a music made by the lyrists and flutists of the necro 
mancer, a troupe of skeletons pirouetted with light click 
ings of their toe-bones; and a rout of mummies bounded 
stiffly; and others of Namirrha’s creatures moved with 
monstrous caperings. To and fro they leapt on the bodies 
of the emperor’s people, in the paces of an evil saraband. 
At every step they grew taller and heavier, till the saltant 
mummies were as the mummies of Anakim, and the 
skeletons were boned like colossi; and louder the music 
rose, drowning the faint cries of Zotulla’s people. And 
huger still became the dancers, towering far into vaulted 
shadow among the vast columns, with thudding feet that 
wrought thunder in the room; and those whereon they 
danced were as grapes trampled for a vintage in autumn; 
and the floor ran deep with a sanguine must. 

As a man drowning in a noisome, night-bound fen, the 
emperor heard the voice of Namirrha: 

“It would seem that my dancers please you not. So 



  

now I shall present you a most royal spectacle. Arise and 
follow me, for the spectacle is one that requires an empire 
for its stage.” 

Zotulla and Obexah rose from their chairs in the fash 
ion of nightwalkers. Giving no backward glance at their 
ministering phantoms, or the hall where the dancers 
bounded, they followed Namirrha to an alcove beyond 
the altar of Thasaidon. Thence, by the upward-coiling 
stairways, they came at length to a broad high balcony 
that faced Zotulla’s palace and looked forth above the 
city roofs toward the bourn of sunset. 

It seemed that several hours had gone by in that hellish 
feasting and entertainment; for the day was near to its 
close, and the sun, which had fallen from sight behind the 
imperial palace, was barring the vast heavens with bloody 
rays. 

“Behold,” said Namirrha, adding a strange vocable to 
which the stone of the edifice resounded like a beaten 
gong. 

The balcony pitched a little, and Zotulla, looking over 
the balustrade, beheld the roofs of Ummaos lessen and 
sink beneath him. It seemed that the balcony flew sky 
ward to a prodigious height, and he peered down across 
the domes of his own palace, upon the houses, the tilled 
fields and the desert beyond, and the huge sun brought 
low on the desert’s verge. And Zlotulla grew giddy; and 
the chill airs of the upper heavens blew upon him. But 

Namirrha spoke another word, and the balcony ceased to 
ascend. 

“Look well,” said the necromancer, “on the empire 
that was yours, but shall be yours no longer.” Then, with 
arms outstretched toward the sunset, and the gulfs be 
yond the sunset, he called aloud the twelve names that 
were perdition to utter, and after them the tremendous in 
vocation: Gna padambis devompra thungis furidor avora- 
gomon. 

Instantly, it seemed that great ebon clouds of thunder 
beetled against the sun. L inin g the horizon, the clouds took 
the form of colossal monsters with heads and members 



  

somewhat resembling those of stallions. Rearing terribly, 
they trod down the sun like an extinguished ember; and 
racing as in some hippodrome of Titans, they rose higher 
and vaster coming toward Ummaos. Deep, calamitous 
rumblings preceded them, and the earth shook visibly, till 
Zotulla saw that these were not immaterial clouds, but ac 
tual living forms that had come forth to tread the world 
in macrocosmic vastness. Throwing their shadows for 
many leagues before them, the coursers charged as if 
devil-ridden into Xylac, and their feet descended like fall 
ing mountain crags upon far oases and towns of the outer 
waste. 

Like a many-turreted storm they came, and it seemed 
that the world sank gulfward, tilting beneath the weight. 
Still as a man enchanted into marble, Zotulla stood and 
beheld the ruining that was wrought on his empire. And 
closer drew the gigantic stallions, racing with inconceiv 
able speed, and louder was the thundering of their foot 
falls, that now began to blot the green fields and fruited 
orchards lying for many miles to the west of Ummaos. 
And the shadow of the stallions climbed like an evil 
gjoom of eclipse, till it covered Ummaos; and looking up, 
the emperor saw their eyes halfway between earth and ze 
nith like baleful suns that glare down from soaring cu 
muli. 

Then, in the thickening gloom, above that insupporable 
thunder, he heard the voice of Namirrha, crying in mad 
triumph: 

“Know, Zotulla, that I have called up the coursers of 
Thamogorgos, lord of the abyss. And the coursers will 
tread your empire down, even as your palfrey trod and 
trampled in former time a beggar boy named Narthos. 
And learn also that I, Namirrha, was that boy.” And the 
eyes of Namirrha, filled with a vainglory of madness and 
bale, burned like malign, disastrous stars at the hour of 
their culmination. 

To Zotulla, wholly mazed with the horror and tumult, 
the necromancer’s words were no more than shrill, 
shrieked overtones of the tempest of doom; and he under 
stood them not. Tremendously, with a rending of 



  

staunch-built roofs, and an instant cleavage and crum 
bling down of mighty masonries, the hooves descended 
upon Ummaos. Fair temple-domes were pashed like 
shells of the haliotis, and haughty mansions were broken 
and stamped into the ground even as gourds; and house 
by house the city was trampled flat with a crashing as of 
worlds beaten into chaos. Far below, in the darkened 
streets, men and camels fled like scurrying emmets but 
could not escape. And implacably the hooves rose and 
fell, till ruin was upon half the city, and night was over 
all. The palace of Zotulla was trodden under, and now 
the forelegs of the coursers loomed level with Namirrha’s 
balcony, and their heads towered awfully above. It 
seemed that they would rear and trample down the necro 
mancer’s house; but at that moment they parted to left 
and right, and dolorous glimmering came from the low 
sunset; and the coursers went on, treading under them 
that portion of Ummaos which lay to the eastward. And 
Zotulla and Obexah and Namirrha looked down on the 
city’s fragments as on a shard-strewn midden, and heard 
the cataclysmic clamor of the hooves departing toward 
eastern Xylac. 

“Now that was a goodly spectacle,” quoth Namirrha. 
Then, turning to the emperor, he added malignly: “Think 
not that I have done with thee, however, or that doom is 
yet consummate.” 

It seemed that the balcony had fallen to its former ele 
vation, which was still a lofty vantage above the sharded 
ruins. And Namirrha plucked the emperor by the arm 
and led him from the balcony to an inner chamber, while 
Obexah followed mutely. The emperor’s heart was 
crushed within him by the trampling of such calamities, 
and despair weighed upon him like a foul incubus on the 
shoulders of a man lost in some land of accursed night. 
And he knew not that he had been parted from Obexah 
on the threshold of the chamber, and that certain of Na 
mirrha’s creatures, appearing like shadows, had com 
pelled the girl to go downward with them by the stairs, 
and had stifled her outcries with their rotten cerements as 
they went. 



  

The chamber was one that Namirrha used for his most 
unhallowed rites and alchemies. The rays of the lamps 
that illumed it were saffron-red like the spilt ichor of dev 
ils, and they flowed on aludels and crucibles and black 
athcinors and alembics whereof the purpose was hardly to 
be named by mortal man. The sorcerer heated in one of 
the alembic dark liquid full of star-cold lights, while 
Zotulla looked on unheeding. And when the liquid bub 
bled and sent forth a spiral vapor, Namirrha distilled it 
into goblets of gold-rimmed iron, and gave one of the 
goblets to Zotulla and retained the other himself. And he 
said to Zotulla with a stem imperative voice: “I bid thee 
quaff this liquor.” 

Zotulla, fearing that the draft was poison, hesitated. 
And the necromancer regarded him with a lethal gaze, 
and cried loudly: “Fearest thou to do as I?” and there 
with he set the goblet to his lips. 

So the emperor drank the draft, constrained as if by 
the bidding of some angel of death, and a darkness fell 
upon his senses. But, ere the darkness grew complete, he 
saw that Namirrha had drained his own goblet. Then, 
with unspeakable agonies, it seemed that the emperor 
died; and his soul floated free; and again he saw the cham 
ber, though with bodiless eyes. And discamate he stood 
in die saffron-crimson light, with his body lying as if dead 
on the floor beside him, and near it the prone body of 
Namirrha and the two fallen goblets. 

Standing thus, he beheld a strange thing: for anon his 
own body stirred and arose, while that of the necro 
mancer remained still as death. And Zotulla looked on 
his own lineaments and his figure in its short cloak of 
azure samite sewn with black pearls and balas-rubies; and 
the body lived before him, though with eyes that held a 
darker fire and a deeper evil than was their wont. Then, 
without corporeal ears, Zotulla heard the figure speak, 
and the voice was the strong, arrogant voice of Namirrha, 
saying: 

“Follow me, O houseless phantom, and do in all things 
as I enjoin thee.” 

Like an unseen shadow, Zotulla followed the wizard, 



  

and the twain went downward by the stairs to the great 
banquet hall. They came to the altar of Thasaidon and 
the mailed image, with the seven horse-skull lamps burn 
ing before it as formerly. Upon the altar, Zotulla’s be 
loved leman Obexah, who alone of women had power to 
stir his sated heart, was lying bound with thongs at Thas- 
aidon’s feet. But the hall beyond was deserted, and noth 
ing remained of that Saturnalia of doom except the fruit 
of the treading, which had flowed together in dark pools 
among the columns. 

Namirrha, using the emperor’s body in all ways for his 
own, paused before the dark eidolon; and he said to the 
spirit of Zotulla: “Be imprisoned in this image, without 
power to free thyself or to stir in any wise.” 

Being wholly obedient to the will of the necromancer, 
the soul of Zotulla was embodied in the statue, and he 
felt its cold, gigantic armor about him like a strait sar 
cophagus, and he peered forth immovably from the bleak 
eyes that were overhung by its carven helmet. 

Gazing thus, he beheld the change that had come on 
his own body through the sorcerous possession of Namir 
rha: for below the short azure cloak, the legs had turned 
suddenly to the hind legs of a black stallion, with hooves 
that glowed redly as if heated by infernal fires. And even 
as Zotulla watched this prodigy, the hooves glowed white 
and incandescent, and fumes mounted from the floor be 
neath them. 

Then, on the black altar, the hybrid abomination came 
pacing haughtily toward Obexah, and smoking hoofprints 
appeared behind it as it came. Pausing beside the girl, 
who lay supine and helpless regarding it with eyes that 
were pools of frozen horror, it raised one glowing hoof 
and set the hoof on her naked bosom between the small 
breast-cups of golden filigree begemmed with rubies. And 
the girl screamed beneath that atrocious treading as the 
soul of one newly damned might scream in hell; and the 
hoof glared with intolerable brilliance, as if freshly 
plucked from a furnace wherein the weapons of demons 
were forged. 

At that moment, in the cowed and crushed and sodden 



  

shade of the emperor Zotulla, close-locked within the 
adamantine image, there awoke the manhood that had 
slumbered unaroused before the ruining of his empire and 
the trampling under of his retinue. Immediately a great 
abhorrence and a high wrath were alive in his soul, and 
mightily he longed for his own right arm to serve him, 
and a sword in his right hand. 

Then it seemed that a voice spoke within him, chill and 
bleak and awful, and as if uttered inwardly by the statue 
itself. And the voice said: “I am Thasaidon, lord of the 
seven hells beneath the earth, and the hells of man’s heart 
above the earth, which are seven times seven. For the 
moment, O Zotulla, my power is become thine for the 
sake of a mutual vengeance. Be one in all ways with the 
statue that has my likeness, even as the soul is one with 
the flesh. Behold! there is a mace of adamant in thy right 
hand. Lift up the mace, and smite.” 

Zotulla was aware of a great power within him, and 
giant thews about him that thrilled with the power and 
responded agilely to his will. He felt in his mailed right 
hand the haft of the huge spiky-headed mace; and though 
the mace was beyond the lifting of any man in mortal 
flesh, it seemed no more than a goodly weight to Zotulla. 
Then, rearing the mace like a warrior in battle, he struck 
down with one crashing blow the impious thing that wore 
his own rightful flesh united with the legs and hooves of a 
demon courser. And the thing crumpled swiftly down and 
lay with the brain spreading pulpily from its shattered 
skull on the shining jet. And the legs twitched a little and 
then grew still; and title hooves glowed from a fiery, blind 
ing white to the redness of red-hot iron, cooling slowly. 

For a space there was no sound, other than the shrill 
screaming of the girl Obexah, mad with pain and the ter 
ror of those prodigies which she had beheld. Then, in the 
soul of Zotulla, grown sick with that screaming, the chill, 
awful voice of Thasaidon spoke again: 

“Go free, for there is nothing more for thee to do.” So 
the spirit of Zotulla passed from the image of Thasaidon 
and found in the wide air the freedom of nothingness and 
oblivion. 



  

But the end was not yet for Namirrha, whose mad, ar 
rogant soul had been loosened from Zotulla’s body by the 
blow, and had returned darkly, not in the manner 
planned by the magician, to its own body lying in the 
room of accursed rites and forbidden transmigrations. 
There Namirrha woke anon, with a dire confusion in his 
mind, and a partial forgetfulness: for the curse of Thasai- 
don was upon him now because of his blasphemies. 

Nothing was clear in his thought except a malign, exor 
bitant longing for revenge: but die reason thereof, and the 
object, were as doubtful shadows. And still prompted by 
that obscure animus, he arose; and girding to his side an 
enchanted sword with runic sapphires and opals in its 
hilt, he descended the stairs and came again to the altar 
of Thasaidon. where the mailed statue stood impassive as 
before, with the poised mace in its immovable right hand, 
and below it, on the altar, the double sacrifice. 

A veil of weird darkness was upon the senses of Na 
mirrha, and he saw not the stallion-legged horror that lay 
dead with slowly blackening hooves; and he heard not the 
moaning of the girl Obexah, who still lived beside it. But 
his eyes were drawn by the diamond mirror that was up 
held in the claws of black iron basilisks beyond the altar; 
and going to the mirror, he saw therein a face that he 
knew no longer for his own. And because his eyes were 
shadowed and his brain filled with shifting webs of delu 
sion, he took the face for that of the emperor Zotulla. In 
satiable as Hell’s own flame, his old hatred rose within 
him; and he drew the enchanted sword and began to hew 
therewith at the reflection. Sometimes, because of the 
curse laid upon him, and the impious transmigration 
which he had performed, he thought himself Zotulla warring 
with the necromancer; and again, in the shiftings of 
his madness, he was Namirrha smiting at the emperor; 
and then without name, he fought a nameless foe. And 
soon the sorcerous blade, though tempered with formida 
ble spells, was broken close to the hilt, and Namirrha be 
held the image still unharmed. Then, howling aloud the 
half-forgotten runes of a most tremendous curse, made 
invalid through his forgettings, he hammered still with the 



  

heavy sword-hilt on the mirror, till the runic sapphires 
and opals cracked in the hilt and fell away at his feet in 
little fragments. 

Obexah, dying on the altar, saw Namirrha battling with 
his image, and the spectacle moved her to mad laughter 
like the pealing of bells of ruined crystal. And above her 
laughter, and above the cursings of Namirrha, there came 
anon like a rumbling of swift-risen storm the thunder 
made by the macrocosmic stallions of Thamogorgos, returning 
gulfward through Xylac over Ummaos, to trample 
down the one house that they had spared aforetime. 


Morthylla 


In Umbri, City of the Delta, the lights blazed with a garish 
brilliance after the setting of that sun which was now 
a coal-red decadent star, grown old beyond chronicle, be 
yond legend. Most brilliant, most garish of all were the 
lights that illumed the house of the aging poet Famurza, 
whose Anacreontic songs had brought him the riches that 
he disbursed in orgies for his friends and sycophants. 
Here, in porticoes, halls and chambers the cressets were 
thick as stars in a cloudless fault It seemed that Famurza 
wished to dissipate all shadows, except those in arrased 
alcoves set apart for the fitful amours of his guests. 

For the kindling of such amours there were wines, cor 
dials, aphrodisiacs. There were meats and fruits that 
swelled the flaccid pulses. There were strange exotic 
drugs that aroused and prolonged pleasure. There were 
curious statuettes in half-veiled niches; and wall panels 
painted with bestial loves, or loves human or superhu 
man. There were hired singers of all sexes, who sang dit 
ties diversely erotic; and dancers whose contortions were 
calculated to restore the outworn sense when all else had 
failed. 



 -  

But to all such incitants Valzain, pupil of Famurza, 
and renowned both as poet and voluptuary, was insensi 
ble. 

With indifference turning toward disgust, a half-emp 
tied cup in his hand, he watched from a comer the gala 
throng that eddied past him, and averted his eyes invol 
untarily from certain couples who were too shameless or 
drunken to seek the shadows of privacy for their dalli 
ance. A sudden satiety had claimed him. He felt himself 
strangely withdrawn from the morass of wine and flesh 
into which, not long before, he had still plunged with delight. He seemed as one who stands on an alien shore, be 
yond waters of deepening separation. 

“What ails you, Valzain? Has a vampire sucked your 
blood?” It was Famurza, flushed, gray-haired, slightly 
corpulent, who stood at his elbow. Laying an affectionate 
hand on Valzain’s shoulder, he hoisted aloft with the 
other that fescenninely graven quart goblet from which he 
was wont to drink only wine, eschewing the dragged and 
violent liquors often preferred by the sybarites of Umbri. 

“Is it billiousness? Or unrequited love? We have cures 
here for both. You have only to name your medicine.” 

“There is no medicine for what ails me,” countered 
Valzain. “As for love, I have ceased to care whether it be 
requited or unrequited. I can taste only the dregs in every 
cup. And tedium lurks at the middle of all kisses.” 

“Truly, yours is a melancholy case.” There was con 
cern in Famurza’s voice. “I have been reading some of 
your late verses. You write only of tombs and yew trees, 
of maggots and phantoms and disembodied love. Such 
stuff gives me the colic. I need at least a half-gallon of 
honest vine juice after each poem.” 

“Though I did not know it till lately,” admitted Val 
zain, “there is in me a curiosity toward the unseen, a 
longing for things beyond the material world.” 

Famurza shook his head commiserately. “Though I 
have attained to more than twice your years, I am still 
content with what I see and hear and touch. Good juicy 
meats, women, wine, the songs of full-throated singers, 
are enough for me.” 



  

“In the dreams of slumber,” mused Valzain. “I have 
clasped succubi who were more than flesh, have known 
delights too keen for the waking body to sustain. Do such 
dreams have any source, outside the earthbom brain it 
self? I would give much to find that source, if it exists. In 
the meanwhile there is nothing for me but despair.” 

“So young—and yet so exhausted! Well, if you’re tired 
of women, and want phantoms instead, I might venture a 
suggestion. Do you know the old necropolis, lying mid 
way between Umbri and Psiom—a matter of perhaps 
three miles from here? The goatherds say that a lamia 
haunts it—the spirit of the princess Morthylla, who died 
several centuries ago and was interred in a mausoleum 
that still stands, overtowering the lesser tombs. Why not 
go forth tonight and visit the necropolis? It should suit 
your mood better than my house. And perhaps Morthylla 
will appear to you. But don’t blame me if you don’t return 
at all. After all those years the lamia is still avid for 
human lovers; and she might well take a fancy to you.” 

“Of course, I know the place,” said Valzain. . . . “But 
I think you are jesting.” 

Famurza shrugged his shoulders and moved on amid 
the revelers. A laughing dancer, blonde-limbed and lis 
som, came up to Valzain and threw a noose of plaited 
flowers about his neck, claiming him as her captive. He 
broke the noose gently, and gave the girl a tepid kiss that 
caused her to make wry faces. Unobtrusively but quickly, 
before others of the merrymakers could try to entice him, 
he left the house of Famurza. 

Without impulses, other than that of an urgent desire 
for solitude, he turned his steps toward the suburbs, avoid 
ing the neighborhood of taverns and lupanars, where the 
populace thronged. Music, laughter, snatches of songs, fol 
lowed him from lighted mansions where symposia were 
held nightly by the city’s richer denizens. But he met few 
roisters on the streets: it was too late for the gathering, too 
early for the dispersal, of guests at such symposia. 

Now the lights thinned out, with ever-widening inter 
vals between, and the streets grew shadowy with that an 
cient night which pressed about Umbri, and would wholly 



  

quench its defiant galaxies of lamp-bright windows with 
the darkening of ’s senescent sun. Of such things, 
and of death’s encircling mystery, were the musings of 
Valzain as he plunged into the outer darkness that he 
found grateful to his glare-wearied eyes. 

Grateful too was the silence of the field-bordered road 
that he pursued for awhile without realizing its direction. 
Then, at some landmark familiar despite the gjoom, it 
came to him that the road was the one which ran from 
Umbri to Psiom, that sister city of the Delta; the road be 
side whose middle meanderings was situated the long-dis 
used necropolis to which Famurza had ironically directed 
him. 

Truly, he thought, the earthly-minded Famurza had 
somehow plumbed the need that lay at the bottom of his 
disenchantment with all sensory pleasures. It would be 
good to visit, to sojourn for an hour or so, in that city 
whose people had long passed beyond the lusts of mortal 
ity, beyond satiety and disillusion. 

A moon, swelling from the crescent toward the half, 
arose behind him as he reached the foot of the low- 
mounded hill on which the cemetery lay. He left the 
paved road, and began to ascend the slope, half-covered 
with stunted gorse, at whose summit the glimmering mar 
bles were discernible. It was without path, other than the 
broken trails made by goats and their herders. Dim, 
lengthened and attenuate, his shadow went before him 
like a ghostly guide. In his fantasy it seemed to him that 
he climbed the gently sloping bosom of a giantess, stud 
ded afar with pale gems that were tombstones and mau 
soleums. He caught himself wondering, amid this poetic 
whimsy, whether the giantess was dead, or merely slept. 

Gaining the flat expansive ground of the summit, where 
dwarfish dying yews disputed with leafless briars the in 
tervals of slabs blotched with lichen, he recalled the tale 
that Famurza had mentioned, anent the lamia who was 
said to hunt the necropolis. Famurza, he knew well, was 
no believer in such legendry, and had meant only to 
mock his funereal mood. Yet, as a poet will, he began to 
play with the fancy of some presence, immortal, lovely 



  

and evil, that dwelt amid the antique marbles and would 
respond to the evocation of one who, without positive be 
lief, had longed vainly for visions from beyond mortality. 

Through headstone aisles of moon-touched solitude, he 
came to a lofty mausoleum, still standing with few signs 
of ruin at the cemetery’s center. Beneath it, he had been 
told, were extensive vaults housing the mummies of an 
extinct royal family that had ruled over the twin cities 
Umbri and Psiom in former centuries. The princess Mor- 
thylla had belonged to this family. 

To his startlement a woman, or what appeared to be 
such, was sitting on a fallen shaft beside the mausoleum. 
He could not see her distinctly; the tomb’s shadow still 
enveloped her from the shoulders downward. The face 
alone, glimmering wanly, was lifted to the rising moon. 
Its profile was such as he had seen on antique coins. 

“Who are you?” he asked, with a curiosity that over 
powered his courtesy. 

“I am the lamia Morthylla,” she replied, in a voice that 
left behind it a faint and elusive vibration like that of 
some briefly sounded harp. “Beware me—for my kisses 
are forbidden to those who would remain numbered 
among the living.” 

Valzain was startled by this answer that echoed his 
fantasies. Yet reason told him that the apparition was no 
spirit of the tombs but a living woman who knew the leg 
end of Morthylla and wished to amuse herself by teasing 
him. And yet what woman would venture alone and at 
night to a place so desolate and eerie? 

Most credibly, she was a wanton who had come out to 
keep a rendezvous ami d the tombs. There were, he knew, 
certain perverse debauchees who required sepulchral sur 
roundings and f urnishings for the titillation of their desires. 

“Perhaps you are waiting for some one,” he suggested. 
“I do not wish to intrude, if such is the case.” 

“I wait only for him who is destined to come. And I 
have waited long, having had no lover for two hundred 
years. Remain, if you wish: there is no one to fear but 
me.” 



  

Despite the rational surmises he had formed, there 
crept along Valzain’s spine the thrill of one who, without 
fully believing, suspects the presence of a thing beyond 
nature . . . Yet surely it was all a game—a game that he 
too could play for the beguilement of his ennui. 

“I came here hoping to meet you,” he declared. “I am 
weary of mortal women, tired of every pleasure—tired 
even of poetry.” 

*% too, am bored,” she said, simply. 

The moon had climbed higher, s hinin g on the dress of 
antique mode that the woman wore. It was cut closely at 
waist and hips and bosom, with voluminous downward 
folds. Valzain had seen such costumes only in old draw 
ings. The princess Morthylla, dead for three centuries, 
might well have worn a similar dress. 

Whoever she might be, he thought, the woman was 
strangely beautiful, with a touch of quaintness in the 
heavily coiled hair whose color he could not decide in the 
moonlight. There was a sweetness about her mouth, a 
shadow of fatigue or sadness beneath her eyes. At the 
right comer of her lips he discerned a small mole. 

Valzain’s meeting with the self-named Morthylla was 
repeated nightly while the moon swelled like the rounding 
breast of a titaness and fell away once more to hollow 
ness and senescence. Always she awaited him by the 
same mausoleum—which, she declared, was her dwelling 
place. And always she dismissed him when the east 
turned ashen with dawn, saying that she was a creature of 
the night. 

Skeptical at first, he thought of her as a person with 
macabre leanings and fantasies akin to his own, with 
whom he was carrying on a flirtation of singular charm. 
Yet about her he could find no hint of the worldliness 
that he suspected: no seeming knowledge of present 
things, but a weird familiarity with the past and the la 
mia’s legend. More and more she seemed a nocturnal 
being, intimate only with shadow and solitude. 

Her eyes, her lips, appeared to withhold secrets forgot 
ten and forbidden. In her vague, ambiguous answers to 



  

his questions, he read meanings that thrilled him with 
hope and fear. 

“I have dreamed of life,” she told him cryptically. 
“And I have dreamed also of death. Now, perhaps there 
is another dream—into which you have entered.” 

“I, too, would dream,” said Valzain. 

Night after night his disgust and weariness sloughed 
away from him, in a fascination fed by the spectral mi 
lieu, the environing silence of the dead, his withdrawal 
and separation from the carnal, garish city. By degrees, 
by alternations of unbelief and belief, he came to accept 
her as the actual lamia. The hunger that he sensed in her 
could be only the lamia’s hunger; her beauty that of a 
being no longer human. It was like a dreamer’s accep 
tance of things fantastic elsewhere than in sleep. 

Together with his belief, there grew his love for her. 
The desires he had thought dead revived within him, 
wilder, more importunate. 

She seemed to love him in return. Yet she betrayed no 
sign of the lamia’s legendary nature, eluding his embrace, 
refusing him the kisses for which he begged. 

“Sometime, perhaps,” she conceded. “But first you 
must know me for what I am, must love me without illu 
sion.” 

“Kill me with your lips, devour me as you are said to 
have devoured other lovers,” beseeched Valzain. 

“Can you not wait?” Her smile was sweet—and tanta 
lizing. “I do not wish your death so soon, for I love you 
too well. Is it not sweet to keep your tryst among the sep 
ulchres? Have I not beguiled you from your boredom? 
Must you end it all?” 

The next night he besought her again, imploring with 
all his ardor and eloquence the denied consummation. 

She mocked him: “Perhaps I am merely a bodiless 
phantom, a spirit without substance. Perhaps you have 
dreamed me. Would you risk an awakening from the 
dream?” 

Valzain stepped toward her, stretching out his arms in 
a passionate gesture. She drew back, saying: 



  

“What if I should turn to ashes and moonlight at your 
touch? You would regret then your rash insistence.” 

“You are the immortal lamia,” avowed Valzain. “My 
senses tell me that you are no phantom, no disembodied 
spirit But for me you have turned all else to shadow.” 

“Yes, I am real enough in my fashion,” she granted, 
laughing softly. Then suddenly she leaned toward him 
and her lips touched his throat. He felt their moist 
warmth a moment—and felt the sharp sting of her teeth 
that barely pierced his skin, withdrawing instantly. Before 
he could clasp her she eluded him again. 

“It is the only Mss permitted to us at present,” she 
cried, and fled swiftly with soundless footfalls among the 
gleams and shadows of the sepulchres. 

On the following afternoon a matter of urgent and 
unwelcome business called Valzain to the neighboring 
city of Psiom: a brief journey, but one that he seldom 
took. 

He passed the ancient necropolis, longing for that noc 
turnal hour when he could hasten once more to a meeting 
with Morthylla. Her poignant Mss, which had drawn a 
few drops of blood, had left him greatly fevered and dis 
traught. He, like that place of tombs, was haunted; and 
the haunting went with him into Psiom. 

He had finis hed his business, the borrowing of a sum 
of money from a usurer. Standing at the usurer’s door, 
with that slightly obnoxious but necessary person beside 
him, he saw a woman passing on the street 

Her features, though not her dress, were those of Mor 
thylla; and there was even the same tiny mole at one cor 
ner of her mouth. No phantom of the cemetery could 
have startled or dismayed him more profoundly. 

“Who is that woman?” he asked the moneylender. “Do 
you know her?” 

“Her name is Beldith. She is well-known in Psiom, 
being rich in her own right and having had numerous lov 
ers. I’ve had a little business with her, though she owes 
me nothing at present. Should you care to meet her? I 
can easily introduce you.” 

“Yes, I should like to meet her,” agreed Valzain. “She 



  

looks strangely like someone that I knew a long time 
ago.” 

The usurer peered slyly at the poet. “She might not 
make too easy a conquest. It is said of late that she has 
withdrawn herself from the pleasures of the city. Some 
have seen her going out at night toward the old necrop 
olis, or returning from it in the early dawn. Strange 
tastes, I’d say, for one who is little more than a harlot. 
But perhaps she goes out to meet some eccentric lover.” 

“Direct me to her house,” Valzain requested. “I shall 
not need you to introduce me.” 

“As you like.” The moneylender shrugged, looking a 
little disappointed. “It’s not far, anyway.” 

Valzain found the house quickly. The woman Beldith 
was alone. She met him with a wistful and troubled smile 
that left no doubt of her identity. 

“I perceive that you have learned the truth,” she said. 
“I had meant to tell you soon, for the deception could not 
have gone on much longer. Will you not forgive me?” 

“I forgive you,” returned Valzain sadly. “But why did 
you deceive me?” 

“Because you desired it. A woman tries to please the 
man whom she loves; and in all love there is more or less 
deception. 

“Like you, Valzain, I had grown tired of pleasure. And 
I sought the solitude of the necropolis, so remote from 
carnal things. You too came, seeking solitude and peace 
—or some unearthly specter. I recognized you at once. 
And I had read your poems. Knowing Morthylla’s legend, 
I thought to play a game with you. Playing it, I grew to 
love you . . . Valzain, you loved me as the lamia. Can 
you not now love me for myself?” 

“It cannot be,” averred the poet. “I fear to repeat the 
disappointment I have found in other women. Yet at least 
I am grateful for the hours you gave me. They were the 
best I have known—even though I have loved something 
that did not, and could not, exist. Farewell, Morthylla. 
Farewell, Beldith.” 

When he had gone, Beldith stretched herself face 
downward among the cushions of her couch. She wept a 



  

little; and the tears made a dampness that quickly dried. 
Later she arose briskly enough and went about her 
household business. 

After a time she returned to the loves and revelries of 
Psiom. Perhaps, in the end, she found such peace as may 
be given to those who have grown too old for pleasure. 

But for Valzain there was no peace, no balm for this 
last and most bitter of disillusionments. Nor could he return 
to the carnalities of his former life. So it was that he 
finally slew himself, stabbing his throat to its deepest vein 
with a keen knife in the same spot which the false lamia’s 
teeth had bitten, drawing a little blood. 

After his death, he forgot that he had died; forgot the 
immediate past with all its happenings and circumstances. 

Following his talk with Famurza, he had gone forth 
from Famurza’s house and from the city of Umbri and 
had taken the road that passed the abandoned cemetery. 
Seized by an impulse to visit it, he had climbed the slope 
toward die marbles under a swelling moon that rose be 
hind him. 

Gaining the flat, expansive ground of the summit, where 
dwarfish dying yews disputed with leafless briars the in 
tervals of slabs blotched with lichen, he recalled the tale 
that Famurza had mentioned, anent the lamia who was 
said to haunt the cemetery. Famurza, he knew well, was 
no believer in such legendry, and had meant only to 
mock his funereal mood. Yet, as a poet will, he began to 
play with the thought of some presence, immortal, lovely 
and evil, that dwelt amid the antique marbles and would 
respond to the vocation of one who, without positive be 
lief, had longed vainly for visions from beyond mortality. 

Through headstone aisles of moon-touched solitude, he 
came to a lofty mausoleum, still standing with few signs 
of ruin at the cemetery’s center. Beneath it, he had been 
told, were extensive vaults housing the mummies of an 
extinct royal family that had ruled over the twin cities 
Umbri and Psiom in former centuries. It was to this fam 
ily that the princess Morthylla had belonged. 

To his startlement a woman, or what appeared to be 
such, was sitting on a fallen shaft beside the mausoleum. 



  

He could not see her distinctly: the tomb’s shadow still 
enveloped her from the shoulders downward. The face 
alone, glimm ering wanly, was lifted to the rising moon. 
Its profile was such as he had seen on antique coins. 

“Who are you?” he asked, with a curiosity that over 
powered his courtesy. 

“I am the lamia Morthylla,” she replied. 


The Black Abbot of Puthuum 


Let the grape yield for us its purple flame. 

And rosy love put off its maidenhood: 

By blackening moons , in lands without a name. 

We slew the Incubus and all his brood. 

—Song of King HoarapKs Bowmen 

Zobal the archer and Cushara the pike-bearer had 
poured many a libation to their friendship in the sanguine 
liquors of Yoros and the blood of the kingdom’s enemies. 
In that long and lusty amity, broken only by such passing 
quarrels as concerned the division of a wine-skin or the 
apportioning of a wench, they had served amid the sol 
diery of King Hoaraph for a strenuous decade. Savage warfare 
and wild, fantastic hazard had been their lot. The renown 
of their valor had drawn upon them, ultimately, the 
honor of Hoaraph’s attention, and he had assigned them 
for duty among the picked warriors that guarded his pal 
ace in Faraad. And sometimes the twain were sent to 
gether on such missions as required no common hardi 
hood and no disputable fealty to the king. 

Now, in company with the eunuch Simban, chief pur 
veyor to Hoaraph’s well-replenished harem, Zobal and 
Cushara had gone on a tedious journey through the tract 
known as Izdrel, which clove the western part of Yoros 
asunder with its rusty-colored wedge of desolation. The 
king had sent them to learn if haply there abode any ver- 



  

ity in certain travelers’ tales, which concerned a young 
maiden of celestial beauty who had been seen among the 
pastoral peoples beyond Izdrel. Simban bore at his girdle 
a bag of gold coins with which, if the girl’s pulchritude 
should be in any wise commensurate with the renown 
thereof, he was empowered to bargain for her purchase. 
The king had deemed that Zobal and Cushara should 
form an escort equal to all contingencies: for Izdrel was a 
land reputedly free of robbers, or, indeed, of any human 
inhabitants. Men said, however, that malign goblins, tall 
as giants and humped like camels, had oftentimes beset 
the wayfarers through Izdrel, that fair but ill-meaning la- 
miae had lured them to an eldritch death. Simban, quak 
ing corpulently in his saddle, rode with small willingness 
on that outward journey; but the archer and the pike- 
bearer, full of wholesome skepticism, divided their bawdy 
jests between the timid eunuch and the elusive demons. 

Without other mishap than the rupturing of a wine-skin 
from the force of the new vintage it contained, they came 
to the verdurous pasture-lands beyond that dreary desert 
Here, in low valleys that held the middle meanderings of 
the river Vos, cattle and dromedaries were kept by a tribe 
of herders who sent biannual tribute to Hoaraph from 
their teeming droves. Simban and his companions found 
the girl, who dwelt with her grandmother in a village be 
side the Vos; and even the eunuch acknowledged that 
their journey was well rewarded. 

Cushara and Zobal, on their part, were instantly smit 
ten by the charms of the maiden, whose name was Ru- 
balsa. She was slender and of queenly height, and her 
skin was pale as the petals of white poppies; and the un- 
dulant blackness of her heavy hair was full of sullen cop 
per gjeamings beneath the sun. While Simban haggled 
shrilly with the cronelike grandmother, the warriors eyed 
Rubalsa with circumspect ardor and addressed to her 
such gallantries as they deemed discreet within hearing of 
the eunuch. 

At last the bargain was driven and the price paid, to 
the sore depletion of Simban’s moneybag. Simban was 
now eager to return to Faraad with his prize, and he 



  

seemed to have forgotten his fear of the haunted desert. 
Zobal and Cushara were routed from their dreams by the 
impatient eunuch before dawn; and the three departed 
with the still drowsy Rubalsa ere the village could awaken 
about them. 

Noon, with its sun of candent copper in a blackish-blue 
zenith, found them far amid the rusty sands and iron 
toothed ridges of Tzdrel. The route they followed was little 
more than a footpath: for, though Izdrel was but thirty 
miles in width at that point, few travelers would dare 
those fiend-infested leagues; and most preferred an im 
mensely circuitous road, used by the herders, that ran to 
the southward of that evil desolation, following the Vos 
nearly to its debouchment in the Indaskian Sea. 

Cushara, splendid in his plate-armor of bronze, on a 
huge piebald mare with a cataphract of leather scaled 
with copper, led the cavalcade. Rubalsa, who wore the 
red homespun of the herders’ women, followed on a 
black gelding with silk and silver harness, which Hoaraph 
had sent for her use. Close behind her came the watchful 
eunuch, gorgeous in particolored sendal, and mounted 
ponderously, with swollen saddlebags all about him, on 
the gray ass of uncertain age which, through his fear of 
horses and camels, he insisted on riding at all times. In his 
hand he held the leading-rope of another ass which was 
nearly crushed to the ground by the wine-skins, water- 
jugs and other provisions. Zobal guarded the rear, with 
unslung bow, slim and wiry in his suiting of light chain 
mail, on a nervous stallion that chafed incessantly at the 
rein. At his back he bore a quiver filled with arrows 
which the court sorcerer, Amdok, had prepared with sin 
gular spells and dippings in doubtful fluids, for his possi 
ble use against demons. Zobal had accepted the arrows 
courteously but had satisfied himself later that their iron 
barbs were in no wise impaired by Amdok’s treatment. A 
similarly ensorceled pike had been offered by Amdok to 
Cushara, who had refused it bluffly, saying that his own 
well-tried weapon was equal to the spitting of any num 
ber of devils. 

Because of Simban and the two asses, the party could 



  

make little speed. However, they hoped to cross the 
wilder and more desolate portion of Izdrel ere night. Sim- 
ban, though he still eyed the dismal waste dubiously, was 
plainly more concerned with his precious charge than 
with the imagined imps and lamiae. And Cushara and 
Zobal, both rapt in amorous reveries that centered about 
the luscious Rubalsa, gave only a perfunctory attention to 
their surroundings. 

The girl had ridden all morning in demure silence. 
Now, suddenly, she cried out in a voice whose sweetness 
was made shrill by alarm. The others reined their mounts, 
and Simban babbled questions. To these Rubalsa replied 
by pointing toward the southern horizon, where, as her 
companions now saw, a peculiar pitch-black darkness had 
covered a great portion of the sky and hills, obliterating 
them wholly. This darkness, which seemed due neither to 
cloud nor sandstorm, extended itself in a crescent on ei 
ther hand, and came swiftly toward the travelers. In the 
course of a minute or less, it had blotted the pathway be 
fore and behind them like a black mist; and the two arcs 
of shadow, racing northward, had flowed together, im 
muring the party in a circle. The darkness then became 
stationary, its walls no more than a hundred feet away on 
every side. Sheer, impenetrable, it surrounded the wayfar 
ers, leaving above them a clear space from which the sun 
still glared down, remote and small and discolored, as if 
seen from the bottom of a deep pit. 

“Ai! ai! ai!” howled Simban, cowering amid his saddle 
bags. “I knew well that some devilry would overtake us.” 

At the same moment the two asses began to bray 
loudly, and the horses, with a frantic neighing and squeal 
ing, trembled beneath their riders. Only with much cruel 
spurring could Zobal force his stallion forward beside 
Cushara’s mare. 

“Mayhap it is only some pestilential mist,” said Cu 
shara. 

“Never have I seen such mist,” replied Zobal doubt 
fully. “And there are no vapors to be met with in IzdreL 
Methinks it is like the smoke of the seven hells that men 
fable beneath .” 



  

“Shall we ride forward?” said Cushara. “I would 
learn whether or not a pike can penetrate that darkness.” 

Calling out some words of reassurance to Rubalsa, the 
twain sought to spur their mounts toward the murky wall. 
But, after a few swerving paces, the mare and the stallion 
balked wildly, sweating and snorting, and would go no 
farther. Cushara and Zobal dismounted and continued 
their advance on foot. 

Not knowing the source or nature of the phenomenon 
with which they had to deal, the two approached it warily. 
Zobal nocked an arrow to his string, and Cushara held 
the great bronze-headed pike before him as if charging 
an embattled foe. Both were more and more puzzled by 
the murkiness, which did not recede before them in the 
fashion of fog, but maintained its opacity when they were 
close upon it. 

Cushara was about to thrust his weapon into the walk 
Then, without the least prelude, there arose in the dark 
ness, seemingly just before him, a horrible multitudinous 
clamor as of drums, trumpets, cymbals, jangling armor, 
jarring voices, and mailed feet that tramped to and fro on 
the stony ground with a mighty clangor. As Cushara and 
Zobal drew back in amazement, the clamor swelled and 
spread till it filled with a babel of warlike noises the 
whole circle of mysterious night that hemmed in the trav 
elers. 

“Verily, we are sore beset,” shouted Cushara to his 
comrade as they went back to their horses. “It would 
seem that some king of the north has sent his myrmidons 
into Yoros.” 

“Yea,” said Zobal. . . . “But it is strange that we saw 
them not ere the darkness came. And the darkness, surely, 
is no natural thing.” 

Before Cushara could make any rejoinder, the martial 
clashings and shoutings ceased abruptly. All about it 
seemed that there was a rattling of innumerable sistra, a 
hissing of countless huge serpents, a raucous hooting of 
ill-omened birds that had foregathered by thousands. To 
these indescribably hideous sounds, the horses now added 
a continual screaming, and the asses a more frenzied 



  

braying, above which the outcries of Rubalsa and Simban 
were scarce audible. 

Cushara and Zobal sought vainly to pacify their 
mounts and comfort the madly frightened girl. It was 
plain that no army of mortal men had beleaguered them: 
for the noises still changed from instant to instant, and 
they heard a most evil howling, and a roaring as of hell- 
bom beasts that deafened them with its volume. 

Naught, however, was visible in the gloom, whose cir 
cle now began to move swiftly, without widening or con 
tracting. To maintain their position in its center, the warriors 
and their charges were compelled to leave the path 
and to flee northwardly amid the harsh ridges and hol 
lows. All around them the baleful noises continued, keep 
ing, as it seemed, the same interval of distance. 

The sun, slanting westward, no longer shone into that 
eerily moving pit, and a deep twilight enveloped the wan 
derers. Zobal and Cushara rode as closely beside Rubalsa 
as the rough ground permitted, straining their eyes con 
stantly for any visible sign of the cohorts that seemed to 
encompass them. Both were filled with the darkest mis 
givings, for it had become all too manifest that supernat 
ural powers were driving them astray in the untracked 
desert. 

Moment by moment the gross darkness seemed to 
close in; and there was a palpable eddying and seething 
as of monstrous forms behind its curtain. The horses 
stumbled over boulders and outcroppings of ore-sharp 
stone, and the grievously burdened asses were compelled 
to put forth an unheard-of speed to keep pace with the 
ever-shifting circle that menaced them with its horrid 
clamor. Rubalsa had ceased her outcries, as if overcome 
by exhaustion or resignation to the horror of her plight; 
and the shrill screeches of the eunuch had subsided into 
fearful wheezing and gasping. 

Ever and anon, it seemed that great fiery eyes glared out 
of the gloom, floating close to earth or moving aloft at a 
gigantic heigjht. Zobal began to shoot his enchanted ar 
rows at these appearances, and the speeding of each bolt 



  

was hailed by an appalling outburst of Satanic laughters 
and ululations. 

In such wise they went on, losing all measure of time 
and sense of orientation. The animals were galled and 
footsore. Simban was nigh dead from fright and fatigue; 
Rubalsa drooped in her saddle; and the warriors, awed 
and baffled by the predicament in which their weapons 
appeared useless, began to flag with a dull weariness. 

“Never again shall I doubt the legendry of Izdrel,” said 
Cushara gloomily. 

“It is in my mind that we have not long either to doubt 
or believe,” rejoined Zobal. 

To add to their distress, the terrain grew rougher and 
steeper, and they climbed acclivitous hillsides and went 
down endlessly into drear valleys. Anon they came to a 
flat, open, pebbly space. There, all at once, it seemed that 
the pandemonium of evil noises drew back on every 
hand, receding and fading into faint, dubious whispers 
that died at a vast remove. Simultaneously, the circling 
night thinned out, and a few stars shone in the welkin, 
and the sharp-spined hills of the desert loomed starkly 
against a vermilion afterglow. The travelers paused and 
peered wonderingly at one another in a gloom that was 
no more than that of natural twilight. 

“What new devilry is this?” asked Cushara, hardly dar 
ing to believe that the hellish leaguers had vanished. 

“I know not,” said the archer, who was staring into the 
dusk. “But here, mayhap, is one of the devils.” 

The others now saw that a muffled figure was ap 
proaching them, bearing a lit lantern made of some kind 
of translucent horn. At some distance behind the figure, 
lights appeared suddenly in a square dark mass which 
none of the party had discerned before. This mass was 
evidently a large building with many windows. 

The figure, drawing near, was revealed by the dim yel 
lowish lantern as a black man of immense girth and tall 
ness, garbed in a voluminous robe of saffron such as was 
worn by certain monkish orders, and crowned with the 
two-homed purple hat of an abbot. He was indeed a sin 
gular and unlooked-for apparition: for if any monasteries 



  

existed amid the barren reaches of Izdrel, they were hid 
den and unknown to the world. Zobal, however, search 
ing his memory, recalled a vague tradition he had once 
heard concerning a chapter of negro monks that had 
flourished in Yoros many centuries ago. The chapter had 
long been extinct, and the very site of its monastery was 
forgotten. Nowadays there were few blacks anywhere in 
the kingdom, other than those who did duty as eunuchs 
guarding the seraglios of nobles and rich merchants. 

The animals began to display a certain uneasiness at 
the stranger’s approach. 

“Who art thou?” challenged Cushara, his fingers tight 
ening on the haft of his weapon. 

The black man grinned capaciously, showing great 
rows of discolored teeth whose incisors were like those of 
a wild dog. His enormous unctuous jowls were creased by 
the grin into folds of amazing number and volume; and 
his eyes, deeply slanted and close together, seemed to 
wink perpetually in pouches that shook like ebon jellies. 
His nostrils flared prodigiously; his purple, blubbery lips 
drooled and quivered, and he licked them with a fat, red, 
salacious tongue before replying to Cushara’s question. 

“I am Ujuk, abbot of the monastery of Puthuum,” he 
said, in a thick voice of such extraordinary volume that it 
appeared almost to issue from the earth under his feet. 
“Methinks the night has overtaken you far from the route 
of travelers. I bid you welcome to our hospitality.” 

“Aye, the night took us betimes,” Cushara returned 
dryly. Neither he nor Zobal was reassured by the look of 
lust in the abbot’s obscenely twinkling eyes as he peered 
at Rubalsa. Moreover, they had now noted the excessive 
and disagreeable length of the dark nails on his huge 
hands and bare, splayed feet: nails that were curving, 
three-inch talons, sharp as those of some beast or bird of 
prey. 

It seemed, however, that Rubalsa and Simban were 
less abhorrently impressed, or had not noticed these details: for both made haste to acknowledge the abbot’s 
proffer of hospitality and to urge acceptance upon the vis 
ibly reluctant warriors. To this urging, Zobal and Cushara 



  

yielded, both inwardly resolving to keep a close watch on 
all the actions and movements of the abbot of Puthuum. 

Ujuk, holding the horn lantern aloft, conducted the 
travelers to that massive building whose lights they had 
discerned at no great distance. A ponderous gate of dark 
wood swung open silently at their approach, and they en 
tered a spacious courtyard cobbled with worn, greasy- 
looking stones, and dimly illumined by torches in rusty 
iron sockets. Several monks appeared with startling sud 
denness before the travelers, who had thought the court 
yard vacant at first glance. They were all of unusual bulk 
and stature, and their features possessed an extraordinary 
likeness to those of Ujuk, from whom, indeed, they could 
hardly have been distinguished save by the yellow cowls 
which they wore in lieu of the abbot’s homed purple hat. 
The similarity extended even to their curved and talon 
like nails of inordinate length. Their movements were 
fantasmally furtive and silent. Without speaking, they 
took charge of the horses and asses. Cushara and Zobal 
relinquished their mounts to the care of these doubtful 
hostlers with a reluctance which, apparently, was not 
shared by Rubalsa or the eunuch. 

The monks also signified a willingness to relieve Cu 
shara of his heavy pike and Zobal of his ironwood bow 
and half-emptied quiver of ensorceled arrows. But at this 
the warriors balked, refusing to let the weapons pass from 
their possession. 

Ujuk led them to an inner portal which gave admission 
to the refectory. It was a large, low room, lit by brazen 
lamps of antique workmanship, such as ghouls might 
have recovered from a desert-sunken tomb. The abbot, 
with ogre-like grinnings, besought his guests to take their 
place at a long massive table of ebony with chairs and 
benches of the same material. 

When they had seated themselves, Ujuk sat down at 
the table’s head. Immediately, four monks came in, bear 
ing platters piled with spicily smoking viands, and deep 
earthen flagons full of a dark amber-brown liquor. And 
these monks, like those encountered in the courtyard, 
were gross ebon-black simulacra of their abbot, resem- 



  

bling him precisely in every feature and member. Zobal 
and Cushara were chary of tasting the liquor, which, for 
its odor, appeared to be an exceptionally potent kind of 
ale: for their doubts concerning Ujuk and his monastery 
grew graver every moment. Also, in spite of their hunger, 
they refrained from the food set before them, which con 
sisted mainly of baked meats that neither could identify. 
Simban and Rubalsa, however, addressed themselves 
promptly to the meal with appetites sharpened by long 
fasting and the weird fatigues of the day. 

The warriors observed that neither food nor drink had 
been placed before Ujuk, and they conjectured that he 
had already dined. To their growing disgust and anger, he 
sat lolling obesely, with lustful eyes upon Rubalsa in a 
stare broken only by the nictitations that accompanied his 
perpetual grinning. This stare soon began to abash the 
girl, and then to alarm and frighten her. She ceased eat 
ing; and Simban, who had been deeply preoccupied till 
then with his supper, was plainly perturbed when he saw 
the flagging of her appetite. He seemed for the first time 
to notice the abbot’s unmonastic leering, and showed his 
disapproval by sundry horrible grimaces. He also remarked 
pointedly, in a loud, piercing voice, that the girl 
was destined for the harem of King Hoaraph. But at this, 
Ujuk merely chuckled, as if Simban had uttered some ex 
quisitely humorous jest. 

Zobal and Cushara were hard put to repress their 
wrath, and both itched hotly for the fleshing of their weap 
ons in the abbot’s gross bulk. He, however, seemed to 
have taken Simban’s hint, for he shifted his gaze from the 
girl. Instead, he began to eye the warriors with a curious 
and loathsome avidity, which they found little less insup 
portable than his ogling of Rubalsa. The well-nourished 
eunuch also came in for his share of Ujuk’s regard, which 
seemed to have in it the hunger of a hyena gloating over 
his prospective prey. 

Simban, obviously ill at ease, and somewhat frightened, 
now tried to carry on a conversation with the abbot, vol 
unteering much information as to himself, his compan 
ions, and the adventures which had brought them to Pu- 



  

thuum. Ujuk seemed little surprised by this information; 
and Zobal and Cushara, who took no part in the conver 
sation, became surer than ever that he was no true abbot. 

“How far have we gone astray from the route to Fa- 
raad?” asked Simban. 

“I do not consider that you have gone astray,” rumbled 
Ujuk in his subterranean voice, “for your coming to Pu- 
thuum is most timely. We have few guests here, and we 
are loth to part with those who honor our hospitality.” 

“King Hoaraph will be impatient for our return with 
the girl,” Simban quavered. “We must depart early to 
morrow.” 

“Tomorrow is another matter,” said Ujuk, in a tone 
half unctuous, half sinister. “Perhaps, by then, you will 
have forgotten this deplorable haste.” 

Little was said during the rest of the meal; and, indeed, 
little was drunk or eaten; for even Simban seemed to 
have lost his normally voracious appetite. Ujuk, still grin 
ning as if at some uproarious jest known only to himself, 
was apparently not concerned with the urging of food 
upon his guests. 

Certain of the monks came and went unbidden, remov 
ing the laden dishes, and as they departed, Zobal and 
Cushara perceived a strange thing: for no shadows were 
cast by the monks on the lamplit floor beside the moving 
adumbrations of the vessels they carried! From Ujuk, 
however, a heavy, misshapen umbrage fell and lay like a 
prone incubus beside his chair. 

“Methinks we have come to a hatching place of demons,” whispered Zobal to Cushara. “We have fought 
many men, thou and I, but never such as wanted whole 
some shadows.” 

“Aye,” muttered the pike-bearer. . . . “But I like this 
abbot even less than his monks: though he alone is the 
caster of a shade.” 

Ujuk now rose from his seat, saying: “I trow that ye 
are all weary and would sleep betimes.” 

Rubalsa and Simban, who had both drunk a certain 
amount of the powerful ale of Puthuum, nodded a drowsy 



  

assent. Zobal and Cushara, noting their premature sleepi 
ness, were glad they had declined the liquor. 

The abbot led his guests along a corridor whose gloom 
was but little relieved by the flaring of torches in a strong 
draft that blew stealthily from an undetermined source, 
causing a rout of wild shadows to flitter beside the pass 
ers. On either hand there were cells with portals shut 
only by hangings of a coarse hempen fabric. The monks 
had all vanished, the cells were seemingly dark, and an 
air of age-old desolation pervaded the monastery, to 
gether with a smell as of moldering bones piled in some 
secret catacomb. 

Midway in the hall, Ujuk paused and held aside the 
arras of a doorway that differed in no wise from the rest. 
Within, a lamp burned, depending from an archaic chain 
of curiously linked and fretted metal. The room was bare 
but spacious, and a bed of ebony with opulent quiltings of 
an olden fashion stood by the farther wall under an open 
window. This chamber, the abbot indicated, was for the 
occupancy of Rubalsa; and he then offered to show the 
men and the eunuch their respective quarters. 

Simban, seeming to wake all at once from his drowsi 
ness, protested at the idea of being separated in such wise 
from his charge. As if Ujuk had been prepared for this, 
and had given orders accordingly, a monk appeared 
forthwith, bringing quilts which he laid on the flagged 
floor within the portals of Rubalsa’s room. Simban 
stretched himself promptly on the improvised bed, and 
the warriors withdrew with Ujuk. 

“Come,” said the abbot, his wolfish teeth gleaming in 
the torchlight. “Ye will sleep soundly in the beds I have 
prepared.” 

Zobal and Cushara, however, had now assumed the 
position of guardsmen outside the doorway of Rubalsa’s 
chamber. They told Ujuk curtly that they were responsi 
ble to King Hoaraph for the girl’s safety and must watch 
over her at all times. 

“I wish ye a pleasant vigil,” said Ujuk, with a cachin- 
nation like the laughter of hyenas in some underground 
tomb. 



  

With his departure, it seemed that the black slumber of 
a dead antiquity settled upon all the building. Rubalsa 
and Simban, apparently, slept without stirring, for there 
was no sound from behind the hempen arras. The warriors 
spoke only in whispers, lest they should arouse the 
girl. Their weapons held ready for instant use, they 
watched the shadowy hall with a jealous vigilance: for 
they did not trust the quietude about them, being well as 
sured that a host of foul cacodemons couched somewhere 
behind it, biding the time of assault. 

Howbeit, nothing occurred to reconfirm them in such 
apprehensions. The draft that breathed furtively along the 
hall seemed to tell only of age-forgotten death and cyclic 
solitude. The two began to perceive signs of dilapidation 
in walls and floor that had heretofore escaped their no 
tice. Eery, fantastical thoughts came to them with insidi 
ous persuasion: it seemed that the building was a ruin that 
had lain uninhabited for a thousand years; that the black 
abbot Ujuk and his shadowless monks were mere imagi 
nations, things that had never been; that the moving cir 
cle of darkness, the pandemonian voices, that had herded 
them toward Puthuum, were no more than a daymare 
whose memory was now fading in the fashion of dreams. 

Thirst and hunger troubled them, for they had not 
eaten since early mom, and had snatched only a few 
hasty drafts of wine or water during the day. Both, how 
ever, began to feel the oncreeping of a sleepy hebetude 
which, under the circumstances, was most undesirable. 
They nodded, started and awoke recurrently to their 
peril. But still, like a siren voice in poppy-dreams, the si 
lence seemed to tell them that all danger was a bygone 
thing, an illusion that belonged to yesterday. 

Several hours passed, and the hall lightened with the 
rising of a late moon that shone through a window at its 
eastern end. Zobal, less bedrowsed than Cushara, was 
awakened to full awareness by a sudden co mm otion 
among the animals in the courtyard without. There were 
loud neighings that rose to a frenzied pitch, as if some 
thing had frightened the horses; and to these the asses 



  

began to add their heavy braying, till Cushara was also 
aroused. 

“Make sure that thou drowsest not again,” Zobal ad 
monished the pike-bearer. “I shall go forth and inquire as 
to the cause of this tumult” 

“’Tis a good thought,” commended Cushara. “And 
while thou art gone, see to it that none has molested our 
provisions. And bring back with thee some apricots and 
cakes of sesame and a skin of ruby-red wine.” 

The monastery itself remained silent as Zobal went 
down the hall, his buskins of link-covered leather ringing 
faintly. At the hall’s end an outer door stood open, and 
he passed through it into the courtyard. Even as he 
emerged, the animals ceased their clamor. He could see 
but dimly, for all the torches in the couryard, save one, 
had burnt out or been extinguished; and the low gibbous 
moon had not yet climbed the wall. Nothing, to all ap 
pearance, was amiss: the two asses were standing quietly 
beside the mountainous piles of provisions and saddlebags 
they had borne; the horses seemed to drowse amicably in 
a group. Zobal decided that perhaps there had been some 
temporary bickering between his stallion and Cushara’s 
mare. 

He went forward to make sure that there was no other 
cause of disturbance. Afterward he turned to the wine 
skins, intending to refresh himself before rejoining Cu 
shara with a supply of drinkables and comestibles. Hardly 
had he washed the dust of Izdrel from his throat with a 
long draft, when he heard an eery, dry whispering whose 
source and distance he could not at once determine. 
Sometimes it seemed at his very ear, and then it ebbed 
away as if sinking into profound subterranean vaults. But 
the sound, though variable in this manner, never ceased 
entirely; and it seemed to shape itself into words that the 
listener almost understood: words that were fraught with 
the hopeless sorrow of a dead man who had sinned long 
ago, and had repented his sin through black sepulchral 
ages. 

As he harkened to the sere anguish of that sound, the 
hair bristled on the archer’s neck, and he knew such fear 



  

as he had never known in the thick of battle. And yet, at 
the same time, he was aware of deeper pity than the pain 
of dying comrades had ever aroused in his heart. And it 
seemed that the voice implored him for commiseration 
and succor, laying upon him a weird compulsion that he 
dared not disobey. He could not wholly comprehend the 
things that the whisperer besougiht him to do: but some 
how he must ease that desolate anguish. 

Still the whispering rose and fell; and Zobal forgot that 
he had left Cushara to a lone vigil beset with hellish dan 
gers; forgot that the voice itself might well be only a device 
of demons to lure him astray. He began to search the 
courtyard, his keen ears alert for the source of the sound; 
and, after some dubitation, he decided that it issued from 
the ground in a comer opposite the gateway. Here, amid 
the cobbling, in the wall’s angle, he found a large slab of 
syenite with a rusty metal ring in its center. He was 
quickly confirmed in his decision: for the whispering be 
came louder and more articulate, and he thought that it 
said to him: “Lift the slab.” 

The archer grasped the rusty ring with both hands, and 
putting forth all his strength, he succeeded in tilting back 
the stone, albeit not without such exertion as made him 
feel that his very spine would crack. A dark opening was 
exposed, and from it surged a charnel stench so overpow 
ering that Zobal turned his face away and was like to 
have vomited. But the whisper came with a sharp, woful 
beseeching, out of the darkness below; and it said to him: 
“Descend.” 

Zobal wrenched from its socket the one torch that still 
burned in the courtyard. By its lurid flaring he saw a 
flight of worn steps that went down into the reeking sep 
ulchral gloom; and resolutely he descended the steps, 
finding himself at their bottom in a hewn vault with deep 
shelves of stone on either hand. The shelves, running 
away into darkness, were piled with human bones and 
mummified bodies; and plainly the place was the cata 
comb of the monastery. 

The whispering had ceased, and Zobal peered about 
him in bewilderment not unmixed with horror.  

“I am here,” resumed the dry, susurrous voice, issuing 
from amid the heaps of mortal remnants on the shelf 
close beside him. Startled, and feeling again that crisping 
of the hairs on his neck, Zobal held his torch to the low 
shelf as he looked for the speaker. In a narrow niche be 
tween stacks of disarticulated bones, he beheld a half- 
decayed corpse about whose long, attenuate limbs and hol 
low body there clung a few rotten shreds of yellow cloth. 
These, he thought, were the remnants of a robe such as 
was worn by the monks of Puthuum. Then, thrusting his 
torch into the niche, he discerned the lean, mummy-like 
head, on which moldered a thing that had once been the 
homed hat of an abbot. The corpse was black as ebony, 
and plainly it was that of a great negro. It bore an aspect 
of incredible age, as if it had lain there for centuries: but 
from it came the odor of newly ripe corruption that had 
sickened Zobal when he lifted the slab of syenite. 

As he stood staring down, it seemed to Zobal that the 
cadaver stirred a little, as if fain to rise from its recumbent 
posture; and he saw a gleaming as of eyeballs in the deep- 
shadowed sockets; and the dolorously curling lips were retracted 
still farther; and from between the bared teeth 
there issued that awful whispering which had drawn him 
into the catacomb. 

“Listen closely,” said the whispering. “There is much 
for me to tell thee, and much for thee to do when the tell 
ing is done. 

“I am Uldor, the abbot of Puthuum. More than a thou 
sand years ago I came with my monks to Yoros from 
Hear, the black empire of the north. The emperor of Ilcar 
had driven us forth, for our cult of celibacy, our worship 
of the maiden goddess Ojhal, were hateful to him. Here 
amid the desert of Izdrel we built our monastery and 
dwelt unmolested. 

“We were many in number at first; but the years went 
by, and one by one the Brothers were laid in the cata 
comb we had delved for our resting place. They died with 
none to replace them. I alone survived in the end: for I 
had won such sanctity as ensures longevous days, and 
had also become a master of the arts of sorcery. Time 
was a demon that I held at bay, like one who stands in a 
charmed circle. My powers were still hale and unimpaired; 
and I lived on as an anchorite in the monastery. 

“At first the solitude was far from irksome to me, and I 
was wholly absorbed in my study of the arcana of nature. 
But after a time it seemed that such things no longer suf 
ficed. I grew aware of my loneliness, and was much beset 
by the demons of the waste, who had troubled me little 
heretofore. Succubi, fair but baneful, lamiae with the 
round soft bodies of women, came to tempt me in the 
drear vigils of the night. 

“I resisted. . . . But there was one she-devil, more 
cunning than the others, who crept into my cell in the 
semblance of a girl I had loved long ago, ere yet I had 
taken the vows of Ojhal. To her I succumbed; and of that 
unholy union was bom the half-human fiend, Ujuk, who 
has since called hims elf the abbot of Puthuum. 

“After that sin, I wished to die. . . . And the wish was 
manifoldly strengthened when I beheld the progeny of the 
sin. Too greatly, however, had I offended Ojhal; and a 
frightful penance was decreed for me. I lived . . . and 
daily I was plagued and persecuted by the monster, Ujuk, 
who grew lustily in the manner of such offspring. But 
when Ujuk had gained his full stature, there came upon 
me such weakness and decrepitude as made me hopeful 
of death. Scarce could I stir in my impotence, and Ujuk, 
taking advantage of this, bore me in his horrid arms to 
the catacomb and laid me among the dead. Here I have 
remained ever since, dying and rotting eternally—and set 
eternally alive. For almost a millennium I have suffered 
unsleepingjy the dire anguish of repentance that brings no 
expiation. 

“Through the powers of saintly and sorcerous vision 
that never left me, I was doomed to watch the foul deeds, 
the hell-dark iniquities of Ujuk. Wearing the guise of an 
abbot, endowed with strange infernal powers together 
with a kind of immortality, he has presided over Puthuum 
through the centuries. His enchantments have kept the 
monastery hidden . . . save from those that he wishes to 
draw within reach of his ghoulish hunger, his incubus-like 



  

desires. Men he devours; and women are made to serve 
his lust. . . . And still I am condemned to see his turpi 
tudes; and the seeing is my most grievous punishment.” 

The whisper sank away; and Zobal, who had listened 
in eldritch awe, as one who hears the speech of a dead 
man, was doubtful for a moment that Uldor still lived. 
Then the sere voice went on: 

“Archer, I crave a boon from thee; and I offer in return 
a thing that will aid thee against Ujuk. In thy quiver 
thou bearest charmed arrows: and the wizardry of him 
that wrought them was good. Such arrows can slay the 
else-immortal powers of evil. They can slay Ujuk—and 
even such evil as endures in me and forbids me to die. 
Archer, grant me an arrow through the heart: and if that 
suffice not, an arrow through the right eye, and one 
through the left. And leave the arrows in their mark, for I 
deem that thou canst well spare so many. One alone is 
needed for Ujuk. As to the monks thou hast seen, I will 
tell thee a secret. They are twelve in number, but . . .” 

Zobal would scarcely have believed the thing that 
Uldor now unfolded, if the events of the day had not left 
him beyond all incredulity. The abbot continued: 

“When I am wholly dead, take thou the talisman which 
depends about my neck. The talisman is a touchstone 
that will dissolve such ill enchantments as have a material 
seeming, if applied thereto with the hand.” 

For the first time, Zobal perceived the talisman, which 
was an oval of plain gray stone lying upon Uldor’s with 
ered bosom on a chain of black silver. 

“Make haste, O archer,” the whispering implored. 

Zobal had socketed his torch in the pile of moldering 
bones beside Uldor. With a sense of mingled compulsion 
and reluctance, he drew an arrow from his quiver, 
notched it, and aimed unflinchingly down at Uldor’s 
heart. The shaft went straightly and deeply into its mark; 
and Zobal waited. But anon from the retracted lips of the 
black abbot there issued a faint murmuring: “Archer, an 
other arrow!” 

Again the bow was drawn, and a shaft sped unerringly 
into the hollow orbit of Uldor’s right eye. And again, after 



  

an interval, there came the almost inaudible pleading: 
“Archer, still another shaft.” 

Once more the bow of ironwood sang in the silent vault, 
and an arrow stood in the left eye of Uldar, quivering 
with the force of its propulsion. This time there was no 
whisper from the rotting lips: but Zobal heard a curious 
rustling, and a sigh as of lapsing sand. Beneath his gaze 
the black limbs and body crumbled swiftly, the face and 
head fell in, and the three arrows sagged awry, since 
there was naught now but a pile of dust and parting 
bones to hold them embedded. 

Leaving the arrows as Uldor had enjoined him to do, 
Zobal groped for the gray talisman that was now buried 
amid those fallen relics. Finding it, he hung it carefully at 
his belt beside the long straight sword which he carried. 
Perhaps, he reflected, the thing might have its use ere the 
night was over. 

Quickly he turned away and climbed the steps to the 
courtyard. A saffron-yellow and lopsided moon was soar 
ing above the wall, and he knew by this that he had been 
absent overlong from his vigil with Cushara. All, how 
ever, seemed tranquil: the drowsing animals had not 
stirred; and the monastery was dark and soundless. Seiz 
ing a full wine-skin and a bag containing such edibles as 
Cushara had asked him to bring, Zobal hurried back to 
the open hall. 

Even as he passed into the building, the arras-like si 
lence before him was burst asunder by a frightful hubbub. 
He distinguished amid the clamor the screaming of Ru- 
balsa, the screeching of Simban, and the furious roaring 
of Cushara: but above these, as if to drown them all, an 
obscene laughter mounted continually, like the welling 
forth of dark subterrene waters thick and foul with the 
fats of corruption. 

Zobal dropped the wine-skin and the sack of comesti 
bles, and raced forward, unslinging his bow as he went. 
The outcries of his companions continued, but he heard 
them faintly now above the damnable incubus-like laugh 
ter that swelled as if to fill the whole monastery. As he 
neared the space before Rubalsa’s chamber, he saw Cu 
shara beating with the haft of his pike at a blank wall 



  

in which there was no longer a hempen-curtained doorway. 
Behind the wall the screeching of Simban ceased in a gur 
gling moan like that of some butchered steer; but the 
girl’s terror-sharpened cries still mounted through the 
smothering cachinnation. 

“This wall was wrought by demons,” raged the pike- 
bearer as he smote vainly at the smooth masonry. “I kept 
a faithful watch—but they built it behind me in a silence 
as of the dead. And a fouler work is being done in that 
chamber.” 

“Master thy frenzy,” said Zobal, as he strove to regain 
the command of his own faculties amid the madness that 
threatened to overwhelm him. At that instant he recalled 
the oval gray touchstone of Uldor, which hung at his 
baldric from its black silver chain; and it came to him 
that the closed wall was perhaps an unreal enchantment 
against which the talisman might serve even as Uldor had 
said. 

Quickly he took the touchstone in his fingers and held 
it to the blank surface where the doorway had been. Cu- 
shara looked on with an air of stupefaction, as if deeming 
the archer demented. But even as the talisman clicked 
faintly against it, the wall seemed to dissolve, leaving only 
a rude arras that fell away in tatters as if it too had been 
no more than a sorcerous illusion. The strange disintegra 
tion continued to spread, the whole partition melted away 
to a few worn blocks, and the gibbous moon shone in as 
the abbey of Puthuum crumbled silently to a gapped and 
roofless ruin! 

All this had occurred in a few moments; but the warriors 
found no room for wonder. By the livid light of the 
moon, which peered down like die face of a worm- 
gnawed cadaver, they looked upon a scene so hideous 
that it caused them to forget all else. Before them, on a 
cracked floor from whose interstices grew desert grasses, 
the eunuch Simban lay sprawled in death. His raiment 
was tom to streamers, and blood bubbled darkly from his 
mangled throat. Even the leather pouches which he bore 
at his girdle had been ripped open, and gold coins, vials 
of medicine and other oddments were scattered around 
him. 



  

Beyond, by the half-crumbled outer wall, Rubalsa lay 
in a Utter of rotted cloth and woodwork which had been 
the gorgeously quilted ebon bed. She was trying to fend 
off with her lifted hands the enormously swoUen shape 
that hung horizontally above her, as if levitated by the 
floating winglike folds of its saffron robe. This shape the 
warriors recognized as the abbot Ujuk. 

The overwelling laughter of the black incubus had 
ceased, and he turned upon the intruders a face contorted 
by diabolic lust and fury. His teeth clashed audibly, his 
eyes glowed in their pouches like beads of red-hot metal, 
as he withdrew from his position over the girl and loomed 
monstrously erect before her amid the ruins of the cham 
ber. 

Cushara rushed forward with leveled pike ere Zobal 
could fit one of his arrows to the string. But even as the 
pike-bearer crossed the siU, it seemed that the foully 
bloated form of Ujuk multipHed itself in a dozen yellow- 
garmented shapes that surged to meet Cushara’s onset 
Appearing as if by some hellish legerdemain, the monks 
of Puthuum had mustered to assist their abbot. 

Zobal cried out in warning, but the shapes were all 
about Cushara, dodging the thrusts of his weapon and 
clawing ferociously at his plate-armor with their terrific 
three-inch talons. Valiantly he fought them, only to go 
down after a little and disappear from sight as if whelmed 
by a pack of ravening hyenas. 

Remembering the scarce credible thing that Uldor had 
told him, Zobal wasted no arrows upon the monks. His 
bow ready, he waited for full sight of Ujuk beyond the 
seething rout that wrangled malignantly back and forth 
above the fallen pike-bearer. In an eddying of the pack 
he aimed swiftly at the looming incubus, who seemed 
wholly intent on that fiendish struggle, as if directing it in 
some wise without spoken word or ponderable gesture. 
Straight and true the arrow sped with an exultant singing; 
and good was the sorcery of Amdok, who had wrought 
it: for Ujuk reeled and went down, his horrid fingers tear 
ing vainly at the shaft that was driven nigh to its fledging 
of eagle-quills in his body. 

Now a strange thing occurred: for, as the incubus fell 



  

and writhed to and fro in his dying, the twelve monks all 
dropped away from Cushara, tossing convulsively on the 
floor as if they were but shaken shadows of the thing that 
died. It seemed to Zobal that their forms grew dim and 
diaphanous, and he saw the cracks in the flagstones be 
yond them; and their writhings lessened with those of 
Ujuk; and when Ujuk lay still at last, the faint outlines of 
the figures vanished as if erased from earth and air. 
Naught remained but the noisome bulk of that fiend who 
had been the progeny of the abbot Uldor and the lamia. 
And the bulk shrank visibly from instant to instant be 
neath its sagging garments, and a smell of ripe corruption 
arose, as if all that was human in the hellish filing were 
rotting swiftly away. 

Cushara had scrambled to his feet and was peering 
about in a stunned fashion. His heavy armor had saved 
him from the talons of his assailants; but the armor itself 
was scored from greaves to helmet with innumerable 
scratches. 

“Whither have the monks gone?” he inquired. “They 
were all about me an instant ago, like so many wild dogs 
worrying a fallen aurochs.” 

“The monks were but emanations of Ujuk,” said 
Zobal. “They were mere fantasms, multiple eidola, that 
he sent forth and withdrew into himself at will; and they 
had no real existence apart from him. With Ujuk’s death 
they had become less than shadows.” 

“Verily, such things are prodigious,” opined the pike- 
bearer. 

The warriors now turned their attention to Rubalsa, 
who had struggled to a sitting posture amid the downfali 
en wreckage of her bed. The tatters of rotten quilting 
which she clutched about her with shamefast fingers at 
their approach, served but little to conceal her well- 
rounded ivory nakedness. She wore an air of mingled 
fright and confusion, like a sleeper who has just awak 
ened from some atrocious nightmare. 

“Had the incubus harmed thee?” inquired Zobal anx 
iously. He was reassured by her faint, bewildered negative.
Dropping his eyes before the piteous disarray of her 
girlish beauty, he felt in his heart a deeper enamorment 



  

than before, a passion touched with such tenderness as he 
had never known in the hot, brief loves of his hazard- 
haunted days. Eyeing Cushara covertly, he knew with dis 
may that this emotion was shared to the fullest by his 
comrade. 

The warriors now withdrew to a little distance and 
turned their backs decorously while Rubalsa dressed. 

“I deem,” said Zobal in a low voice beyond overhear 
ing of the girl, “that thou and I tonight have met and 
conquered such perils as were not contracted for in our 
service to Hoaraph. And I deem that we are of one mind 
concerning the maiden, and love her too dearly now to 
deliver her to the captious lust of a sated king. Therefore 
we cannot return to Faraad. If it please thee, we shall 
draw lots for the girl; and the loser will attend the winner 
as a true comrade till such time as we have made our way 
from Izdrel, and have crossed the border of some land 
lying beyond Hoaraph’s rule.” 

To this Cushara agreed. When Rubalsa had finished 
her dressing, the two began to look about them for such 
objects as might serve in the proposed sortilege. Cushara 
would have tossed one of the gold coins, stamped with 
Hoaraph’s image, which had rolled from Simban’s tom 
moneybag. But Zobal shook his head at the suggestion, 
having espied certain items which he thought even more 
exquisitely appropriate than the coin. These objects were 
the talons of the incubus, whose corpse had now dwin 
dled in size and was horribly decayed, with a hideous 
wrinkling of the whole head and an actual shortening of 
the members. In this process, the claws of hands and feet 
had all dropped away and were lying loose on the pave 
ment. Removing his helmet, Zobal stooped down and 
placed within it the five hellish-looking talons of the right 
hand, among which that of the index finger was the 
longest. 

He shook the helmet vigorously, as one shakes a dice- 
box, and there was a sharp clattering from the claws. 
Then he held the helmet out to Cushara, saying: “He 
who draws the forefinger talon shall take the girl.” 

Cushara put in his hand and withdrew it quickly, hold- 



  

ing aloft the heavy thumbnail, which was shortest of all. 
Zobal drew the nail of the middle finger; and Cushara, at 
his second trial, brought forth the little finger’s claw. 
Then, to the deep chagrin of the pike-bearer, Zobal pro 
duced the dearly coveted index talon. 

Rubalsa, who had been watching this singular proce 
dure with open curiosity, now said to the warriors: 
“What are ye doing?” 

Zobal started to explain, but before he had finished, 
the girl cried out indignantly: “Neither of ye has con 
sulted my preference in this matter.” Then, pouting pret 
tily, she turned away from the disconcerted archer and 
flung her arms about the neck of Cushara. 


The Tomb-Spawn 


Evening had come from the desert into Faraad, bringing 
the last stragglers of caravans. In a wineshop near the 
northern gate, many traveling merchants from outer 
lands, parched and weary, were refreshing themselves 
with the famed vintages of Yoros. To divert them from 
their fatigue, a storyteller spoke amid the clinking of the 
wine-cups: 

“Great was Ossaru, being both king and wizard. He 
ruled over half the continent of . His armies 
were like the rolling sands, blown by the simoom. He 
commanded the genii of storm and of darkness, he called 
down the spirits of the sun. Men knew his wizardry as the 
green cedars know the biasring of levin. 

“Half immortal, he lived from age to age, waxing in his 
wisdom and power till the end. Thasaidon, black god of 
evil, prospered his every spell and enterprise. And during 
his latter years he was companioned by the monster 
Nioth Korghai, who came down to Earth from an alien 
world, riding a fire-maned comet. 



  

“Ossaru, by his skill in astrology, had foreseen the 
coming of Nioth KorghaL Alone, he went forth into the 
desert to await the monster. In many lands people saw 
the falling of the comet, like a sun that came down by 
night upon the waste; but only King Ossaru beheld the 
arrival of Nioth KorghaL He returned in the black, 
moonless hours before dawn, when all men slept, bringing 
the strange monster to his palace, and housing him in a 
vault beneath the throne-room, which he had prepared 
for Nioth Korghai’s abode. 

“Dwelling always thereafter in the vault, the monster 
remained unknown and unbeheld. It was said that he 
gave advice to Ossaru, and instructed him in the lore of 
the outer planets. At certain periods of the stars, women 
and young warriors were sent down as a sacrifice to 
Nioth Korghai; and these never returned to give account 
of that which they had seen. None could surmise his as 
pect; but all who entered the palace heard ever in the 
vault beneath a muffled noise as of slow-beaten drums, 
and a regurgitation such as would be made by an under 
ground fountain; and sometimes men heard an evil cack 
ling as of a mad cockatrice. 

“For many years King Ossaru was served by Nioth 
Korghai, and gave service to the monster in return. Then 
Nioth Korghai sickened with a strange malady, and men 
heard no more the cackling in the sunken vault; and the 
noises of drums and fountain-mouths grew fainter, and 
ceased. The spells of the wizard king were powerless to 
avert his death; but when the monster had died, Ossaru 
surrounded his body with a double zone of enchantment, 
circle by circle, and closed the vault. And later, when Os 
saru died, the vault was opened from above, and the 
king’s mummy was lowered therein by his slaves, to repose 
for ever beside that which remained of Nioth Korghal 

“Cycles have gone by since then; and Ossaru is but a 
name on the lips of storytellers. Lost now is the palace 
wherein he dwelt, and the city thereabout, some saying 
that it stood in Yoros, and some, in the empire of Cincor, 
where Yethlyreom was later built by the Nimboth dy- 



  

nasty. And this alone is certain, that somewhere still, in 
the sealed tomb, the alien monster abides in death, to 
gether with King Ossaru. And about them still is the 
inner circle of Ossaru’s enchantment, rendering their bod 
ies incorruptible throughout all the decay of cities and 
kingdoms; and around this is another circle, guarding 
against all intrusion: since he who enters there by the 
tomb’s door will die instantly and will putrefy in the mo 
ment of death, falling to dusty corruption ere he strike 
the ground. 

“Such is the legend of Ossaru and Nioth Korghai. No 
man has ever found their tomb; but the wizard Namirrha, 
prophesying darkly, foretold many ages ago that certain 
travelers, passing through the desert, would some day 
come upon it unaware. And he said that these travelers, 
descending into the tomb by another way than the door, 
would behold a strange prodigy. And he spoke not con 
cerning the nature of the prodigy, but said only that 
Nioth Korghai, being a creature from some far world, 
was obedient to alien laws in death as in life. And of that 
which Namirrha meant, no man has yet guessed the se 
cret.” 

The brothers Milab and Marabac, who were jewel- 
merchants from Ustaim, had listened rapdy to the story 
teller. 

“Now truly this is a strange tale,” said Milab. “How 
ever, as all men know, there were great wizards in the 
olden days, workers of deep enchantment and wonder; 
and also there were true prophets. And the sands of Zo- 
thique are full of lost tombs and cities.” 

“It is a good story,” said Marabac, “but it lacks an 
ending. Prithee, O teller of tales, canst tell us no more 
than this? Was there no treasure of precious metals and 
jewels entombed with the monster and the king? I have 
seen sepulchers where the dead were walled with gold in 
gots, and sarcophagi that poured forth rubies like the 
gouted blood of vampires.” 

“I relate the legend as my fathers told it,” affirmed the 
storyteller. “They who are destined to find the tomb must 
tell the rest—if haply they return from the finding.” 



  

Milab and Marabac had traded their store of uncut 
jewels, of carven talismans and small jasper and camelian 
idols, making a good profit in Faraad. Now, laden with 
rosy and purple-black pearls from the southern gulfs, and 
the black sapphires and winy garnets of Yoros, they were 
returning northward toward Tasuun with a company of 
other merchants on the long, circuitous journey to Ustaim 
by the orient sea. 

The way had led through a dying land. Now, as the 
caravan approached the borders of Yoros, the desert 
began to assume a profounder desolation. The hills were 
dark and lean, like recumbent mummies of giants. Dry 
waterways ran down to lake-bottoms leprous with salt. 
Billows of gray sand were driven high on the crumbling 
cliffs, where gentle waters had once rippled. Columns of 
dust arose and went by like fugitive phantoms. Over all, 
the sun was a monstrous ember in a charred heaven. 

Into this waste, which was seemingly unpeopled and 
void of life, the caravan went warily. Urging their camels 
to a swift trot in the narrow, deep-walled ravines, the 
merchants made ready their spears and claymores and 
scanned the barren ridges with anxious eyes. For here, in 
hidden caves, there lurked a wild and half-bestial people, 
known as the Ghorii. Akin to the ghouls and jackals, they 
were eaters of carrion; and also they were anthropophagi, 
subsisting by preference on the bodies of travelers, and 
drinking their blood in lieu of water or wine. They were 
dreaded by all who had occasion to journey between 
Yoros and Tasuun. 

The sun climbed to its meridian, searching with ruth 
less beams the nethermost umbrage of the strait, steep defiles. The fine ash-light sand was no longer stirred by any 
puff of wind. 

Now the road ran downward, following the course of 
some olden stream between acclivitous banks. Here, in 
lieu of former pools, there were pits of sand dammed up 
by riffles or boulders, in which the camels floundered 
knee-deep. And here, without the least warning in a turn 
of the sinuous bed, the gully swarmed and seethed with 
the hideous earth-brown bodies of the Ghorii, who ap- 



  

peared instantaneously on all sides, leaping wolfishly from 
the rocky slopes or flinging themselves like panthers from 
the high ledges. 

These ghoulish apparitions were unspeakably ferocious 
and agile. Uttering no sound, other than a sort of hoarse 
coughing and spitting, and armed only with their double 
rows of pointed teeth and their siclde-like talons, they 
poured over the caravan in a climbing wave. It seemed 
that there were scores of them to each man and camel. 
Several of the dromedaries were thrown to earth at once, 
with the Ghorii gnawing their legs and haunches and 
chines, or hanging dog-wise at their throats. They and 
their drivers were buried from sight by the ravenous mon 
sters, who began to devour them immediately. Boxes of 
jewels and bales of rich fabrics were tom open in the 
melee, jasper and onyx idols were strewn ignominiously 
in the dust, pearls and rubies, unheeded, lay weltering in 
puddled blood; for these things were of no value to the 
Ghorii. 

Milab and Marabac, as it happened, were riding at the 
rear. They had lagged behind, somewhat against their 
will, since the camel ridden by Milab had gone lame from 
a stone-bruise; and thus, by good fortune, they evaded 
the ghoulish onset. Pausing aghast, they beheld the fate of 
their companions, whose resistance was overcome with 
horrible quickness. The Ghorii, however, did not perceive 
Milab and Marabac, being wholly intent on devouring the 
camels and merchants they had dragged down, as well as 
those members of their own band that were wounded by 
the swords and lances of the travelers. 

The two brothers, leveling their spears, would have rid 
den forward to perish bravely and uselessly with their fel 
lows. But, terrified by the hideous tumult, by the odor of 
blood and the hyena-like scent of the Ghorii, their drome 
daries balked and bolted, carrying them back along the 
route into Yoros. 

During this unpremeditated flight they soon saw an 
other band of the Ghorii, who had appeared far off on 
the southern slopes and were running to intercept them. 
To avoid this new peril Milab and Marabac turned their 



  

camels into a side ravine. Traveling slowly because of the 
lameness of Milab’s dromedary, and think ing to find the 
swift Ghorii on their heels at any moment, they went 
eastward for many miles with the sun lowering behind 
them, and came at midaftemoon to the low and rainless 
watershed of that immemorial region. 

Here they looked out over a sunken plain, wrinkled 
and eroded, where the white walls and domes of some in 
nominate city gleamed. It appeared to Milab and Mara- 
bac that the city was only a few leagues away. Deeming 
they had sighted some hidden town of the outer sands, 
and hopeful now of escaping their pursuers, they began 
the descent of the long slope toward the plain. 

For two days, on a powdery terrain that was like the 
bituminous dust of mummies, they traveled toward the 
ever-receding domes that had seemed so near. Their 
plight became desperate; for between them they possessed 
only a handful of dried apricots and a water bag that was 
three-fourths empty. Their provisions, together with their 
stock of jewels and carvings, had been lost with the 
pack-dromedaries of the caravan. Apparently there was 
no pursuit from the Ghorii; but about them there gath 
ered the red demons of thirst, the black demons of hun 
ger. On the second morning Milab’s camel refused to rise 
and would not respond either to the cursing of its master 
or the prodding of his spear. Thereafter, the two shared 
the remaining camel, riding together or by turns. 

Often they lost sight of the gleaming city, which ap 
peared and disappeared like a mirage. But an hour before 
sunset, on the second day, they followed the far-thrown 
shadows of broken obelisks and crumbling watchtowers 
into the olden streets. 

The place had once been a metropolis; but now many 
of its lordly mansions were scattered shards or heaps of 
downfalien blocks. Great dunes of sand had poured in 
through proud triumphal arches, had filled the pavements 
and courtyards. Lurching with exhaustion, and sick at 
heart with the failure of their hope, Milab and Marabac 
went on, searching everywhere for some well or cistern 
that the long desert years had haply spared. 



  

In the city’s heart, where the walls of temples and lofty 
buildings of state still served as a barrier to the engulfing 
sand, they found the ruins of an old aqueduct, leading to 
cisterns dry as furnaces. There were dust-choked foun 
tains in the market places but nowhere was there any 
thing to betoken the presence of water. 

Wandering hopelessly on, they came to the ruins of a 
huge edifice which, it appeared, had been the palace of 
some forgotten monarch. The mighty walls, defying the 
erosion of ages, were still extant. The portals, guarded on 
either hand by green brazen images of mythic heroes, still 
frowned with unbroken arches. Mounting the marble 
steps, the jewelers entered a vast, roofless hall where Cy 
clopean columns towered as if to bear up the desert sky. 

The broad pavement flags were mounded with debris 
of arches and architraves and pilasters. At the hall’s far 
extreme there was a dais of black-veined marble on 
which, presumably, a royal throne had once reared. Near 
ing the dais, Milab and Marabac both heard a low and 
indistinct gurgling as of some hidden stream or fountain, 
that appeared to rise from underground depths below the 
palace pavement. 

Eagerly trying to locate the source of the sound, they 
climbed the dais. Here a huge block had fallen from the 
wall above, perhaps recently, and the marble had cracked 
beneath its weight, and a portion of the dais had broken 
through into some underlying vault, leaving a dark and 
jagged aperture. It was from this opening that the water 
like regurgitation rose, incessant and regular as the beat 
ing of a pulse. 

The jewelers leaned above the pit, and peered down 
into webby darkness shot with a doubtful glimmering that 
came from an indiscernible source. They could see noth 
ing. A dank and musty odor touched their nostrils, like 
the breath of some long-sealed reservoir. It seemed to 
them that the steady fountain-like noise was only a few 
feet below in the shadows, a little to one side of the open 
ing. 

Neither of them could determine the depth of the vault. 
After a brief consultation they returned to their camel. 



  

which was waiting stolidly at the palace entrance; and removing 
the camel’s harness they knotted the long reins 
and leather body-bands into a single thong that would 
serve them in lieu of rope. Going back to the dais, they 
secured one end of this thong to the fallen block, and 
lowered the other into the dark pit. 

Milab descended hand over hand into the depths for 
ten or twelve feet before his toes encountered a solid sur 
face. Still gripping the thong cautiously, he found himself 
on a level floor of stone. The day was fast waning beyond 
the palace walls; but a wan glimmer was afforded by the 
hole in the pavement above; and the outlines of a half 
open door, sagging at a ruinous angle, were revealed at 
one side by the feeble twilight that entered the vault from 
unknown crypts or stairs beyond. 

While Marabac came nimbly down to join him, Milab 
peered about for the source of the water-like noise. Be 
fore him in the undetermined shadows he discerned the 
dim and puzzling contours of an object that he could 
liken only to some enormous clepsydra or fountain sur 
rounded with grotesque carvings. 

The light seemed to fail momently. Unable to decide 
the nature of the object, and having neither torch nor 
candle, he tore a strip from the hem of his hempen bur 
noose, and lit the slow-burning cloth and held it aloft at 
arm’s length before him. By the dull, smoldering lumi 
nance thus obtained, the jewelers beheld more clearly the 
thing that bulked prodigious and monstrous, rearing 
above them from the fragment-littered floor to the shad 
owy roof. 

The thing was like some blasphemous dream of a mad 
devil. Its main portion or body was umlike in form and 
was pedestaled on a queerly tilted block of stone at the 
vault’s center. It was palish and pitted with innumerable 
small apertures. From its bosom and flattened base many 
armlike and leglike projections trailed in swollen night 
mare segments to the ground; and two other members, 
sloping tautly, reached down like roots into an open and 
seemingly empty sarcophagus of gilded metal, graven with 
weird archaic ciphers, that stood beside the block. 



  

The um-shaped torso was endowed with two heads. 
One of these heads was beaked like a cuttlefish and was 
lined with long oblique slits where the eyes should have 
been. The other head, in close juxtaposition on the narrow 
shoulders, was that of an aged man, dark and regal and 
terrible, whose burning eyes were like balas-rubies and 
whose grizzled beard had grown to the length of jungle 
moss on the loathsomely porous trunk. This trunk, on the 
side below the human head, displayed a faint outline as of 
ribs; and some of the members ended in human hands and 
feet, or possessed anthropomorphic jointings. 

Through heads, limbs and body there ran recurrently 
the mysterious noise of regurgitation that had drawn 
Milab and Marabac to enter the vault. At each repetition 
of the sound a slimy dew exuded from the monstrous 
pores and rilled sluggishly down in endless drops. 

The jewelers were held speechless and immobile by a 
clammy terror. Unable to avert their gaze, they met the 
baleful eyes of the human head, glaring upon them from 
its unearthly eminence. Then, as the hempen strip in Mil- 
ab’s fingers burned slowly away and failed to a red 
smolder, and darkness gathered again in the vault, they 
saw the blind slits in the other head open gradually, pour 
ing forth a hot, yellow, intolerably flaming light as they 
expanded to immense round orbits. At the same time they 
heard a singular drumlike throbbing, as if the heart of the 
huge monster had become audible. 

They knew only that a strange horror not of earth, or 
but partially of earth, was before them. The sight deprived them of thought and memory. Least of all did they 
remember the storyteller in Faraad, and the tale he had 
told concerning the hidden tomb of Ossaru and Nioth 
Korghai, and the prophecy of the tomb’s finding by those 
who should come to it unaware. 

Swiftly, with a dreadful stretching and straightening, 
the monster lifted its foremost members, ending in the 
brown, shriveled hands of an old man, and reached out 
toward the jewelers. From the cuttlefish beak there issued 
a shrill demonian cackling; from the mouth of the kingly 
graybeard head a sonorous voice began to utter words of 



  

solemn cadence, like some enchanter’s rune, in a tongue 
unknown to Milab and Marabac. 

They recoiled before the abhorrently groping hands. In 
a frenzy of fear and panic, by the streaming light of its 
incandescent orbs, they saw the anomaly rise and lumber 
forward from its stone seat, walking clumsily and uncer 
tainly on its ill-assorted members. There was a trampling 
of elphantine pads—and a stumbling of human feet inad 
equate to bear up their share of the blasphemous hulk. 
The two stiffly sloping tentacles were withdrawn from the 
gold sarcophagus, their ends muffled by empty, jewel- 
sewn cloths of a precious purple, such as would be used 
for the winding of some royal mummy. With a ceaseless 
and insane cackling, a malign thundering as of curses that 
broke to senile quavers, the double-headed horror leaned 
toward Milab and Marabac. 

Turning, they ran wildly across the roomy vault. Be 
fore them, ill umin ed now by the pouring rays from the 
monster’s orbits, they saw the half-open door of somber 
metal whose bolts and hinges had rusted away, permitting 
it to sag inward. The door was of cyclopean height and 
breadth, as if designed for beings huger than man. Be 
yond it were the dim reaches of a twilight corridor. 

Five paces from the doorway there was a faint red line 
that followed the chamber’s conformation on the dusty 
floor. Marabac, a little ahead of his brother, crossed the 
line. As if checked in midair by some invisible wall, he 
faltered and stopped. His limbs and body seemed to melt 
away beneath the burnoose—the burnoose itself became 
tattered as with incalculable age. Dust floated on the air 
in a tenuous cloud, and there was a momentary gle amin g 
of white bones where his outflung hands had been. Then 
the bones too were gone—and an empty heap of rags lay 
rotting on the floor. 

A faint odor as of corruption rose to the nostrils of 
Milab. Uncomprehending, he had checked his own flight 
for an instant. Then, on his shoulders, he felt the grasp of 
slimy, withered hands. The cackling and muttering of the 
heads was like a demon chorus behind him. The drumlike 
beating, the noise of rising fountains, were loud in his 



  

ears. With one swiftly dying scream he followed Marabac 
over the red line. 

The enormity that was both man and star-bom mon 
ster, the nameless amalgam of an unearthly resurrection, 
still lumbered on and did not pause. With the hands of 
that Ossaru who had forgotten his own enchantment, it 
reached for the two piles of empty rags. Reaching, it en 
tered the zone of death and dissolution which Ossaru 
himself had established to guard the vault for ever. For 
an instant, on the air, there was a melting as of mis 
shapen cloud, a falling as of light ashes. After that the 
darkness returned, and with the darkness, silence. 

Night settled above that nameless land, that forgotten 
city; and with its coming the Ghorii, who had followed 
Milab and Marabac over the desert plain. Swiftly they 
slew and ate the camel that waited patiently at the palace 
entrance. Later, in the old hall of columns, they found 
that opening in the dais through which the jewelers had 
descended. Hungrily they gathered about the hole, sniffing 
at the tomb beneath. Then, baffled, they went away, their 
keen nostrils telling them that the scent was lost, that the 
tomb was empty either of life or death. 


f 


The Last Hieroglyph 


The world itself, in the end , shall be turned to a round 
cipher. 


—Old prophecy of , 


Nushain the astrologer had studied the circling orbs of 
night from many far-separated regions, and had cast, with 
such skill as he was able to command, the horoscopes of 
a myriad men, women and children. From city to city, 
from realm to realm he had gone, abiding briefly in any 
place: for often the local magistrates had banished him as 



  

a common charlatan; or elsewise, in due time, his consul 
tants had discovered the error of his predictions and had 
fallen away from him. Sometimes he went hungry and 
shabby; and small honor was paid to him anywhere. The 
sole companions of his precarious fortunes were a 
wretched mongrel dog that had somehow attached itself 
to him in the desert town of Zul-Bha-Sair, and a mute, 
one-eyed negro whom he had bought very cheaply in 
Yoros. He had named the dog Ansarath, after the canine 
star, and had called the negro Mouzda, which was a 
word signifying darkness. 

In the course of his prolonged itinerations, the astrolo 
ger came to Xylac and made his abode in its capital, 
Ummaos, which had been built above the shards of an 
elder city of the same name, long since destroyed by a 
sorcerer’s wrath. Here Nushain lodged with Ansarath and 
Mouzda in a half-ruinous attic of a rotting tenement; and 
from the tenement’s roof, Nushain was wont to observe 
the positions and movements of the sidereal bodies on eve 
nings not obscured by the fumes of the city. At intervals 
some housewife or harlot, some porter or huckster or petty 
merchant would climb the decaying stairs to his chamber, 
and would pay him a small sum for the nativity which he 
plotted with immense care by the aid of Ids tattered 
books of astrological science. 

When, as often occurred, he found himself still at a 
loss regarding the significance of some heavenly conjunc 
tion or opposition after poring over his books, he would 
consult Ansarath, and would draw profound auguries 
from the variable motions of the dog’s mangy tail or his 
actions in searching for fleas. Certain of these divinations 
were fulfilled, to the considerable benefit of Nushain’s renown 
in Ummaos. People came to him more freely and 
frequently, hearing that he was a soothsayer of some 
note; and, moreover, he was immune from prosecution, 
owing to the liberal laws of Xylac, which permitted all 
the sorcerous and mantic arts. 

It seemed, for the first time, that the dark planets of his 
fate were yielding to auspicious stars. For this fortune, 
and the coins which accrued thereby to his purse, he gave 



  

thanks to Vergama who, throughout the whole continent 
of , was deemed the most powerful and mysteri 
ous of the genii, and was thought to rule over the heavens 
as well as the earth. 

On a summer night, when the stars were strewn thickly 
like a fiery sand on the black azure vault, Nushain went 
up to the roof of his lodging place. As was often his cus 
tom, he took with him the negro Mouzda, whose one eye 
possessed a miraculous sharpness and had served well, on 
many occasions, to supplement the astrologer’s own 
rather nearsighted vision. Through a well codified system 
of signs and gestures, the mute was able to communicate 
the result of his observations to Nushain. 

On this night the constellation of the Great Dog, which 
had presided over Nushain’s birth, was ascendant in the 
east. Regarding it closely, the dim eyes of the astrologer 
were troubled by a sense of something unfamiliar in its 
configuration. He could not determine the precise charac 
ter of the change till Mouzda, who evinced much excite 
ment, called his attention to three new stars of the second 
magnitude which had appeared in close proximity to the 
Dog’s hindquarters. These remarkable novae, which Nu 
shain could discern only as three reddish blurs, formed a 
small equilateral triangle. Nushain and Mouzda were both 
certain that they had not been visible on any previous 
evening. 

“By Vergama, this is a strange thing,” swore the astrol 
oger, filled with amazement and dumfoundment. He 
began to compute the problematic influence of the novae 
on his future reading of the heavens, and perceived at 
once that they would exert, according to the law of astral 
emanations, a modifying effect on his own destiny, which 
had been so largely controlled by the Dog. 

He could not, however, without consulting his books 
and tables, decide the particular trend and import of this 
supervening influence; though he felt sure that it was 
most momentous, whether for his bale or welfare. Leaving 
Mouzda to watch the heavens for other prodigies, he 
descended at once to his attic. There, after collating the 
opinions of several old-time astrologers on the power ex- 



  

erted by novae, he began to recast his own horoscope. 
Painfully and with much agitation he labored throughout 
the night, and did not finish his figurings till the dawn 
came to mix a deathly grayness with the yellow light of 
the candles. 

There was, it seemed, but one possible interpretation of 
the altered heavens. The appearance of the triangle of 
novae in conjunction with the Dog, signified clearly that 
Nushain was to start ere long on an unpremeditated jour 
ney which would involve the transit of no less than three 
elements. Mouzda and Ansarath were to accompany him; 
and three guides, appearing successively, at the proper 
times, would lead him toward a destined goal. So much 
his calculations had revealed, but no more: there was 
nothing to foretell whether the journey would prove aus 
picious or disastrous, nothing to indicate its bourn, pur 
pose or direction. 

The astrologer was much disturbed by this somewhat 
singular and equivocal augury. He was ill pleased by the 
prospect of an imminent journey, for he did not wish to 
leave Ummaos, among whose credulous people he had 
begun to establish himself not without success. Moreover, 
a strong apprehension was roused within him by the 
oddly manifold nature and veiled outcome of the journey. 
All this, he felt, was suggestive of the workings of some 
occult and perhaps sinister providence; and surely it was 
no common traveling which would take him through 
three elements and would require a triple guidance. 

During the nights that followed, he and Mouzda 
watched the mysterious novae as they went over toward 
the west behind the bright-flaming Dog. And he puzzled 
interminably over his charts and volumes, hoping to dis 
cover some error in the reading he had made. But always, 
in the end, he was compelled to the same interpretation. 

More and more, as time went on, he was troubled by 
the thought of that unwelcome and mysterious journey 
which he must make. He continued to prosper in Um 
maos, and it seemed that there was no conceivable reason 
for his departure from that city. He was as one who 
awaited a dark and secret summons, not knowing whence 



  

it would come, nor at what hour. Throughout the days, 
he scanned with fearful anxiety the faces of his visitors, 
deeming that the first of the three star-predicted guides 
might arrive unheralded and unrecognized among them. 

Mouzda and the dog Ansarath, with the intuition of 
dumb things, were sensible of the weird uneasiness felt by 
their master. They shared it palpably, the negro showing 
his apprehension by wild and demoniac grimaces, and the 
dog crouching under the astrologer’s table or prowling 
restlessly to and fro with his half-hairless tail between his 
legs. Such behavior, in its turn, served to reconfirm the 
inquietude of Nushain, who deemed it a bad omen. 

On a certain evening, Nushain pored for the fiftieth 
time over his horoscope, which he had drawn with sun 
dry-colored inks on a sheet of papyrus. He was much 
startled when, on the blank lower margin of the sheet, he 
saw a curious character which was no part of his own 
scribbling. The character was a hieroglyph written in dark 
bituminous brown, and seeming to represent a mummy 
whose shroudings were loosened about the legs and 
whose feet were set in the posture of a long stride. It was 
facing toward that quarter of the chart where stood the 
sign indicating the Great Dog, which, in , was a 
House of the Zodiac. 

Nushain’s surprise turned to a sort of trepidation as he 
studied the hieroglyph. He knew that the margin of the 
chart had been wholly clear on the previous night; and 
during the past day he had not left the attic at any time. 
Mouzda, he felt sure, would never have dared to touch 
the chart; and, moreover, the negro was little skilled in 
writing. Among the various inks employed by Nushain, 
there was none that resembled the sullen brown of the 
character, which seemed to stand out in a sad relief on 
the white papyrus. 

Nushain felt the alarm of one who confronts a sinister 
and unexplainable apparition. No human hand, surely, 
had inscribed the mummy-shapen character, like the sign 
of a strange outer planet about to invade the Houses of 
his horoscope. Here, as in the advent of the three novae, 
an occult agency was suggested. Vainly, for many hours. 



  

he sought to unriddle the mystery: but in all his books 
there was naught to enlighten him; for this thing, it 
seemed, was wholly without precedent in astrology. 

During the next day he was busied from mom till eve 
by the plotting of those destinies ordained by the heavens 
for certain people of Ummaos. After completing the cal 
culations with his usual toilsome care, he unrolled his, 
own chart once more, albeit with trembling fingers. An 
eeriness that was nigh to panic seized him when he saw 
that the brown hieroglyph no longer stood on the margin, 
but was now placed like a striding figure in one of the 
lower Houses, where it still fronted toward the Dog, as if 
advancing on that ascendant sign. 

Henceforth the astrologer was fevered by the awe and 
curiosity of one who watches a fatal but inscrutable por 
tent. Never, during the hours that he pondered above it, 
was there any change in the intruding character; and yet, 
on each successive evening when he took out the chart, he 
saw that the mummy had strode upward into a higher 
House, drawing always nearer to the House of the 
Dog . . . 

There came a time when the figure stood on the Dog’s 
threshold. Portentous with mystery and menace that were 
still beyond the astrologer’s divining, it seemed to wait 
while the night wore on and was shot through by the gray 
wefting of dawn. Then, overworn with his prolonged 
studies and vigils, Nushain slept in his chair. Without the 
troubling of any dream he slept; and Mouzda was careful 
not to disturb him; and no visitors came to the attic on 
that day. So the mom and the noon and the afternoon 
went over, and their going was unheeded by Nushain. 

He was awakened at eve by the loud and dolorous 
howling of Ansarath, which appeared to issue from the 
room’s farthest comer. Confusedly, ere he opened his 
eyes, he became aware of an odor of bitter spices and 
piercing natron. Then, with the dim webs of sleep not 
wholly swept from his vision, he beheld, by the yellowy 
tapers that Mouzda had lighted, a tall, mummy-like form 
that waited in silence beside him. The head, arms and 
body of the shape were wound closely with bitumen-col- 



  

ored cerements; but the folds were loosened from the hips 
downward, and the figure stood like a walker, with one 
brown, withered foot in advance of its fellow. 

Terror quickened in Nushain’s heart, and it came to 
him that the shrouded shape, whether lich or phantom, 
resembled the weird, invasive hieroglyph that had passed 
from House to House through the chart of his destiny. 
Then, from the thick swathings of the apparition, a voice 
issued indistinctly, saying: “Prepare yourself, O Nushain, 
for I am the first guide of that journey which was foretold 
to you by the stars.” 

Ansarath, cowering beneath the astrologer’s bed, was 
still howling his fear of the visitant; and Nushain saw that 
Mouzda had tried to conceal himself in company with the 
dog. 

Though a chill as of imminent death was upon him, and 
he deemed the apparition to be death itself, Nushain 
arose from his chair with that dignity proper to an astrol 
oger, which he had maintained through all the vicissitudes 
of his lifetime. He called Mouzda and Ansarath from 
their hiding place, and the two obeyed him, though with 
many cringings before the dark, muffled mummy. 

With the comrades of his fortune behind him, Nushain 
turned to the visitant. “I am ready,” he said, in a voice 
whose quavering was almost imperceptible. “But I would 
take with me certain of my belongings.” 

The mummy shook his mobled head. “It were well to 
take with you nothing but your horoscope: for this alone 
shall you retain in the end.” 

Nushain stooped above the table on which he had left 
his nativity. Before he began to roll the open papyrus, he 
noticed that the hieroglyph of the mummy had vanished. 
It was as if the written symbol, after moving athwart his 
horoscope, had materialized itself in the figure that now 
attended him. But on the chart’s nether margin, in remote 
opposition to the Dog, was the sea-blue hieroglyph of a 
quaint merman with carplike tail and head half human, 
half apish; and behind the merman was the black hiero 
glyph of a small barge. 

Nushain’s fear, for a moment, was subdued by wonder. 



  

But he rolled the chart carefully, and stood holding it in 
his right hand. 

“Come,” said the guide. “Your time is brief, and you 
must pass through the three elements that guard the 
dwelling place of Vergama from unseasonable intrusion.” 

These words, in a measure, confirmed the astrologer’s 
divinations. But the mystery of his future fate was in no 
wise lightened by the intimation that he must enter, pre 
sumably at the journey’s end, the dim house of that being 
called Vergama, whom some considered the most secret 
of all the gods, and others the most cryptical of demons. 
In all the lands of , there were rumors and fables 
regarding Vergama; but these were wholly diverse and 
contradictory, except in their common attribution of al 
most omnipotent powers to this entity. No man knew the 
situation of his abode; but it was believed that vast multi 
tudes of people had entered it during the centuries and 
milleniums, and that none had returned therefrom. 

Ofttimes had Nushain called upon the name of Ver 
gama, swearing or protesting thereby as men are wont to 
do by the cognomens of their shrouded lords. But now, 
hearing the name from the lips of his macabre visitor, he 
was filled with the darkest and most eerie apprehensions. 
He sought to subdue these feelings, and to resign himself 
to the manifest will of the stars. With Mouzda and Ansar- 
ath at his heels, he followed the striding mummy, which 
seemed little hampered, if at all, by its trailing cerements. 

With one regretful backward glance at his littered 
books and papers, he passed from the attic room and 
down the tenement stairs. A wannish light seemed to 
cling about the swathings of the mummy; but, apart from 
this, there was no illumination; and Nushain thought that 
the house was strangely dark and silent, as if all its occu 
pants had died or had gone away. He heard no sound 
from the evening city; nor could he see aught but close-en 
croaching darkness beyond the windows that should have 
gazed on a litten street. Also, it seemed that the stairs had 
changed and lengthened, giving no more on the courtyard 
of the tenement, but plunging deviously into an unsus- 



  

pected region of stifling vaults and foul, dismal, nitrous 
corridors. 

Here the air was pregnant with death, and the heart of 
Nushain failed him. Everywhere, in the shadow-curtained 
crypts and deep-shelved recesses, he felt the innumerable 
presence of the dead. He thought that there was a sad 
sighing of stirred cerements, a breath exhaled by long- 
stiffened cadavers, a dry clicking of lipless teeth beside 
him as he went. But darkness walled his vision, and he 
saw nothing save the luminous form of his guide, who 
stalked onward as if through a natal realm. 

It seemed to Nushain that he passed through boundless 
catacombs in which were housed the mortality and cor 
ruption of all the ages. Behind him still he heard the shuf 
fling of Mouzda, and at whiles the low, frightened whine 
of Ansarath; so he knew that the twain were faithful to 
him. But upon him, with a chill of lethal damps, there 
grew the horror of his surroundings; and he shrank with 
all the repulsion of living flesh from the shrouded thing 
that he followed, and those other things that moldered 
round about in the fathomless gloom. 

Half thinking to hearten himself by the sound of his 
own voice, he began to question the guide; though his 
tongue clove to his mouth as if palsied. “Is it indeed Ver- 
gama, and none other, who has summoned me forth upon 
this journey? For what purpose has he called me? And in 
what land is his dwelling?” 

“Your fate has summoned you,” said the mummy. “In 
the end, at the time appointed and no sooner, you shall 
learn the purpose. As to your third question, you would 
be no wiser if I should name the region in which the 
house of Vergama is hidden from mortal trespass: for the 
land is not listed on any terrene chart, nor map of the 
starry heavens.” 

These answers seemed equivocal and disquieting to 
Nushain, who was possessed by frightful forebodings as 
he went deeper into the subterranean charnels. Dark, in 
deed, he thought, must be the goal of a journey whose 
first stage had led him so far amid the empire of death 
and corruption; and dubious, surely, was the being who 



  

had called him forth and had sent to him as the first 
guide a sere and shrunken mummy clad in the tomb’s ha 
biliments. 

Now, as he pondered these matters almost to frenzy, 
the shelfy walls of the catacomb before him were outlined 
by a dismal light, and he came after the mummy into a 
chamber where tall candles of black pitch in sockets of 
tarnished silver burned about an immense and solitary 
sarcophagus. Upon the blank lid and sides of the sar 
cophagus, as Nushain neared it, he could see neither runes 
nor sculptures nor hieroglyphs engraven; but it seemed, 
from the proportions, that a giant must lie within. 

The mummy passed athwart the chamber without 
pausing. But Nushain, seeing that the vaults beyond were 
full of darkness, drew back with a reluctance that he 
could not conquer; and though the stars had decreed his 
journey, it seemed to him that human flesh could go no 
farther. Prompted by a sudden impulse, he seized one of 
the heavy yard-long tapers that burned stilly about the 
sarcophagus; and, holding it in his left hand, with his 
horoscope still firmly clutched in the right, he fled with 
Mouzda and Ansarath on the way he had come, hoping 
to retrace his footsteps through the gloomy caverns and 
return to Ummaos by the taper’s light. 

He heard no sound of pursuit from the mummy. But 
ever, as he fled, the pitch candle, flaring wildly, revealed 
to him the horrors that darkness had erstwhile curtained 
from his eyes. He saw the bones of men that were piled 
in repugnant confusion with those of fell monsters, and 
the riven sarcophagi from which protruded the half-de 
cayed members of innominate beings; members which 
were neither heads nor hands nor feet. And soon the cat 
acomb divided and redivided before him, so that he must 
choose his way at random, not knowing whether it would 
lead him back to Ummaos or into the untrod depths. 

Presently he came to the huge, browless skull of an un 
couth creature, which reposed on the ground with up- 
ward-gazing orbits; and beyond the skull was the mon 
ster’s moldy skeleton, wholly blocking the passage. Its 
ribs were cramped by the narrowing walls, as if it had 



  

crept there and had died in die darkness, unable to with 
draw or go forward. White spiders, demon-headed and 
large as monkeys, had woven their webs in the hollow 
arches of the bones; and they swarmed out interminably 
as Nushain approached; and die skeleton seemed to stir 
and quiver as they seethed over it abhorrendy and 
dropped to the ground before the astrologer. Behind them 
others poured in a coundess army, crowding and man 
tling every ossicle. Nushain fled with his companions; and 
running back to the forking of the caverns, he followed 
another passage. 

Here he was not pursued by the demon spiders. But, 
hurrying on lest they or the mummy overtake him, he 
was soon halted by the rim of a great pit which filled the 
catacomb from wall to wall and was overwide for the 
leaping of man. The dog Ansarath, sniffing certain odors 
that arose from the pit, recoiled with a mad howling; and 
Nushain, holding his taper outstretched above it, dis 
cerned far down a glimmer of ripples spreading circle- 
wise on some unctuous black fluid; and two blood-red 
spots appeared to swim with a weaving motion at the cen 
ter. Then he heard a hissing as of some great cauldron 
heated by wizard fires; and it seemed that the blackness 
boiled upward, mounting swiftly and evilly to overflow 
the pit; and the red spots, as they neared him, were like 
luminous eyes that gazed malignantly into his own . . . 

So Nushain turned away in haste; and, returning upon 
his steps, he found the mummy awaiting him at the junc 
tion of the catacombs. 

“It would seem, O Nushain, that you have doubted 
your own horoscope,” said the guide, with a certain 
irony. “However, even a bad astrologer, on occasion, may 
read the heavens aright. Obey, then, the stars that decreed your journey.” 

Henceforward, Nushain followed the mummy without 
recalcitrance. Returning to the chamber in which stood 
the immense sarcophagus, he was enjoined by his guide 
to replace in its socket the black taper he had stolen. 
Without other light than the phosphorescence of the 
mummy’s cerements, he threaded the foul gloom of those 



  

profounder ossuaries which lay beyond. At last, through 
caverns where a dull dawning intruded upon the shadows, 
he came out beneath shrouded heavens, on the shore of a 
wild sea that clamored in mist and cloud and spindrift. 
As if recoiling from the harsh air and light, the mummy 
drew back into the subterrane, and it said: 

“Here my dominion ends, and I must leave you to 
await the second guide.” 

Standing with the poignant sea-salt in his nostrils, with 
his hair and garments outblown on the gale, Nushain 
heard a metallic clangor, and saw that a door of rusty 
bronze had closed in the cavern entrance. The beach was 
walled by unscalable cliffs that ran sheerly to the wave on 
each hand. So perforce the astrologer waited; and from 
the tom surf he beheld ere long the emergence of a sea- 
blue merman whose head was half human, half apish; 
and behind the merman there hove a small black barge 
that was not steered or rowed by any visible being. At 
this, Nushain recalled the hieroglyphs of the sea creature 
and the boat which had appeared on the margin of his 
nativity; and unrolling the papyrus, he saw with wonder 
ment that the figures were both gone; and he doubted not 
that they had passed, like the mummy’s hieroglyph, 
through all the zodiacal Houses, even to that House 
which presided over his destiny; and thence, mayhap, 
they had emerged into material being. But in their stead 
now was the burning hieroglyph of a fire-colored sala 
mander, set opposite to the Great Dog. 

The merman beckoned to him with antic gestures, grin 
ning deeply, and showing the white serrations of his 
sharklike teeth. Nushain went forward and entered the 
barge in obedience to the signs made by the sea creature; 
and Mouzda and Ansarath, in faithfulness to their master, 
accompanied him. Thereupon the merman swam away 
through the boiling surf; and the barge, as if oared and 
ruddered by mere enchantment, swung about forthwith, 
and warring smoothly against wind and wave, was drawn 
straightly over that dim, unnamable ocean. 

Half seen amid rushing foam and mist, the merman 
swam steadily on before. Time and space were surely out- 



  

passed during that voyage; and as if he had gone beyond 
mortal existence, Nushain experienced neither thirst nor 
hunger. But it seemed that his soul drifted upon seas of 
strange doubt and direst alienation; and he feared the 
misty chaos about him even as he had feared the nighted 
catacombs. Often he tried to question the mer-creature 
concerning their destination, but received no answer. And 
the wind blowing from shores unguessed, and the tide 
flowing to unknown gulfs, were alike filled with whispers 
of awe and terror. 

Nushain pondered the mysteries of his journey almost 
to madness; and the thought came to him that, after pass 
ing through the region of death, he was now traversing 
the gray limbo of uncreated things; and, thinking this, he 
was loath to surmise the third stage of his journey; and he 
dared not reflect upon the nature of its goal. 

Anon, suddenly, the mists were riven, and a cataract of 
golden rays poured down from a high-seated sun. Near at 
hand, to the lee of the driving barge, a tall island hove 
with verdurous trees and light, shell-shapen domes, and 
blossomy gardens hanging far up in the dazzlement of 
noon. There, with a sleepy purling, the surf was lulled on 
a low, grassy shore that had known not the anger of 
storm; and fruited vines and full-blown flowers were pen 
dent above the water. It seemed that a spell of oblivion 
and slumber was shed from the island, and that any who 
landed thereon would dwell inviolable forever in sun- 
bright dreams. Nushain was seized with a longing for its 
green, bowery refuge; and he wished to voyage no further 
into the dreadful nothingness of the mistbound ocean. 
And between his longing and his terror, he quite forgot 
the terms of that destiny which had been ordained for 
him by the stars. 

There was no halting nor swerving of the barge; but it 
drew still nearer to the isle in its coasting; and Nushain 
saw that the intervening water was clear and shallow, so 
that a tall man might easily wade to the beach. He sprang 
into the sea, holding his horoscope aloft, and began to 
walk toward the island; and Mouzda and Ansarath fol 
lowed him, swimming side by side. 



  

Though hampered somewhat by his long wet robes, the 
astrologer thought to reach that alluring shore; nor was 
there any movement on the part of the merman to inter 
cept him. The water was midway between his waist and 
his armpits; and now it lapped at his girdle; and now at 
the knee-folds of his garment; and the island vines and 
blossoms drooped fragrantly above him. 

Then, being but a step from that enchanted beach, he 
heard a great hissing, and saw that the vines, the boughs, 
the flowers, the very grasses, were intertwined and com 
mingled with a million serpents, writhing endlessly to and 
fro in hideous agitation. From all parts of that lofty island 
the hissing came, and the serpents, with foully mottled 
volumes, coiled, crept and slithered upon it everywhere; 
and no single yard of its surface was free from their defilement, or clear for human treading. 

Turning seaward in his revulsion, Nushain found the 
merman and the barge waiting close at hand. Hopelessly 
he reentered the barge with his followers, and the magi 
cally driven boat resumed its course. And now, for the 
first time, the merman spoke, saying over his shoulder in 
a harsh, half-articulate voice, not without irony: “It 
would seem, O Nushain, that you lack faith in your own 
divinations. However, even the poorest of astrologers may 
sometimes cast a horoscope correctly. Cease, then, to 
rebel against that which the stars have written.” 

The barge drove on, and the mists closed heavily about 
it, and the noon-bright island was lost to view. After a 
vague interim the muffled sun went down behind inchoate 
waters and clouds; and a darkness as of primal night lay 
everywhere. Presently, through the tom rack, Nushain be 
held a strange heaven whose signs and planets he could 
not recognize; and at this there came upon him the black 
horror of utmost dereliction. Then the mists and clouds 
returned, veiling that unknown sky from his scrutiny. 
And he could discern nothing but the merman, who was 
visible by a wan phosphor that clung always about him in 
his swimming. 

Still the barge drove on; and in time it seemed that a 
red morning rose stifled and conflagrant behind the mists. 



  

The boat entered the broadening light, and Nushain, who 
had thought to behold the sun once more, was dazzled by 
a strange shore where flames towered in a high unbroken 
wall, feeding perpetually, to all appearance, on bare sand 
and rock. With a mighty leaping and a roar as of blown 
surf the flames went up, and a heat like that of many fur 
naces smote far on the sea. Swiftly the barge neared the 
shore; and the merman, with uncouth gestures of fare 
well, dived and disappeared under the waters. 

Nushain could scarcely regard the flames or endure 
their heat. But the barge touched the strait tongue of land 
lying between them and the sea; and before Nushain, 
from the red wall of fire, a blazing salamander emerged, 
having the form and hue of that hieroglyph which had 
last appeared on his horoscope. And he knew, with in 
effable consternation, that this was the third guide of his 
threefold journey. 

“Come with me,” said the salamander, in a voice like 
the crackling of fagots. Nushain stepped from the barge 
to that strand which was hot as an oven beneath his feet; 
and behind him, though with palpable loathness, Mouzda 
and Ansarath still followed. But, approaching the flames 
behind the salamander, and half swooning from their 
ardor, he was overcome by the weakness of mortal flesh; 
and seeking again to evade his destiny, he fled along the 
narrow scroll of beach between the fire and the water. 
But he had gone only a few paces when the salamander, 
with a great fiery roaring and racing, intercepted him; and 
it drove him straight toward the fire with terrible Sailings 
of its dragon-like tail, from which showers of sparks were 
emitted. He could not face the salamander, and he 
thought the flames would consume him like paper as he 
entered them: but in the wall there appeared a sort of 
opening, and the fires arched themselves into an arcade, 
and he passed through with his followers, herded by the 
salamander, into an ashen land where all things were 
veiled with low-hanging smoke and steam. Here the sala 
mander observed with a kind of irony: “Not wrongly, O 
Nushain, have you interpreted the stars of your horo 
scope. And now your journey draws to an end, and you 



  

will need no longer the services of a guide.” So saying, it 
left him, going out like a quenched fire on the smoky air. 

Nushain, standing irresolute, beheld before him a white 
stairway that mounted amid the veering vapors. Behind 
him the flames rose unbroken, like a topless rampart; and 
on either hand, from instant to instant, the smoke shaped 
itself into demon forms and faces that menaced him. He 
began to climb the stairs, and the shapes gathered below 
and about him, frightful as a wizard’s familiars, and keep 
ing pace with him as he went upward, so that he dared 
not pause or retreat. Far up he climbed in the fumy dim 
ness, and came unaware to the open portals of a house of 
gray stone rearing to unguessed height and amplitude. 

Unwillingly, but driven by the thronging of the smoky 
shapes, he passed through the portals with his compan 
ions. The house was a place of long empty halls, tor 
tuous as the folds of a sea conch. There were no win 
dows, no lamps; but it seemed that bright suns of silver 
had been dissolved and diffused in the air. Fleeing from 
the hellish wraiths that pursued him, the astrologer fol 
lowed the winding halls and emerged ultimately in an 
inner chamber where space itself was immured. At the 
room’s center a cowled and muffled figure of colossal pro 
portions sat upright on a marble chair, silent, unstirring. 
Before the figure, on a sort of table, a vast volume lay 
open. 

Nushain felt the awe of one who approaches the pres 
ence of some high demon or deity. Seeing that the phan 
toms had vanished, he paused on the room’s threshold: 
for its immensity made him giddy, like the void interval 
that lies between the worlds. He wished to withdraw; but 
a voice issued from the cowled being, speaking softly as 
the voice of his own inmost mind: 

“I am Vergama, whose other name is Destiny; Ver 
gama, on whom you have called so ignorantly and idly, 
as men are wont to call on their hidden lords; Vergama, 
who has summoned you on the journey which all men 
must make at one time or another, in one way or another 
way. Come forward, O Nushain, and read a little in my 
book.” 



  

The astrologer was drawn as by an unseen hand to the 
table. Leaning above it, he saw that the huge volume 
stood open at its middle pages, which were covered with 
a myriad signs written in inks of various colours, and rep 
resenting men, gods, fishes, birds, monsters, animals, 
constellations, and many other things. At the end of the 
last column of the right-hand page, where little space was 
left for other inscriptions, Nushain beheld the hieroglyphs 
of an equal-sided triangle of stars, such as had lately ap 
peared in proximity to the Dog; and, following these, the 
hieroglyphs of a mummy, a merman, a barge and a sala 
mander, resembling the figures that had come and gone 
on his horoscope, and those that had guided him to the 
house of Vergama. 

“In my book,” said the cowled figure, “the characters 
of all things are written and preserved. All visible forms, 
in the beginning, were but symbols written by me; and at 
the last they shall exist only as the writing of my book. 
For a season they issue forth, taking to themselves that 
which is known as substance. ... It was I, O Nushain, 
who set in the heavens the stars that foretold your jour 
ney; I, who sent the three guides. And these things, hav 
ing served their purpose, are now but infoliate ciphers, as 
before.” 

Vergama paused, and an infinite silence returned to the 
room, and a measureless wonder was upon the mind of 
Nushain. Then the cowled being continued: 

“Among men, for awhile, there was that person called 
Nushain the astrologer, together with the dog Ansarath 
and the negro Mouzda, who followed his fortunes. . . . 
But now, very shortly, I must turn the page, and before 
turning it, must finish the writing that belongs thereon.” 

Nushain thought that a wind arose in the chamber, 
moving lightly with a weird sough and sigh, though he 
felt not the actual breath of its passing. But he saw that 
the fur of Ansarath, cowering close beside him, was ruf 
fled by the wind. Then, beneath his marveling eyes, the 
dog began to dwindle and wither, as if sered by a lethal 
magic; and he lessened to the size of a rat, and thence to 
the smallness of a mouse and the lightness of an insect. 



  

though preserving still his original form. After that, the 
tiny thing was caught up by the sighing air, and it flew 
past Nushain as a gnat might fly; and, following it, he saw 
that the hieroglyph of a dog was inscribed suddenly be 
side that of the salamander, at the bottom of the right- 
hand page. But, apart from this, there remained no trace 
of Ansarath. 

Again a wind breathed in the room, touching not the 
astrologer, but fluttering the ragged raiment of Mouzda, 
who crouched near to his master, as if appealing for 
protection. And the mute became shrunken and shriveled, 
turning at the last to a thin light and thin as the black, 
tattered wing-shard of a beetle, which the air bore aloft. 
And Nushain saw that the hieroglyph of a one-eyed negro 
was inscribed following that of the dog; but, aside from 
this, there was no sign of Mouzda. 

Now, perceiving clearly the doom that was designed 
for him, Nushain would have fled from the presence of 
Vergama. He turned from the outspread volume and ran 
toward the chamber door, his worn, tawdry robes of an 
astrologer flapping about his thin shanks. But softly in his 
ear, as he went, there sounded the voice of Vergama: 

“Vainly do men seek to resist or evade that destiny 
which turns them to ciphers in the end. In my book, O 
Nushain, there is room even for a bad astrologer.” 

Once more the weird sighing arose, and a cold air 
played upon Nushain as he ran; and he paused midway in 
the vast room as if a wall had arrested him. Gently the 
air breathed on his lean, gaunt figure, and it lifted his 
graying locks and beard, and it plucked softly at the roll 
of papyrus which he still held in his hand. To his dim 
eyes, the room seemed to reel and swell, expanding infi 
nitely. Borne upward, around and around, in a swift ver 
tiginous swirling, he beheld the seated shape as it loomed 
ever higher above him in cosmic vastness. Then the god 
was lost in light; and Nushain was a weightless and exile 
thing, the withered skeleton of a lost leaf, rising and fall 
ing on the bright whirlwind. 

In the book of Vergama, at the end of the last column 



  

of the right-hand page, there stood the hieroglyph of a 
gaunt astrologer, carrying a furled nativity. 

Vergama leaned forward from his chair, and turned the 
page. 


The Isle of The Torturers 


Between the sun’s departure and return, the Silver 
Death had fallen upon Yoros. Its advent, however, had 
been foretold in many prophecies, both immemorial and 
recent. Astrologers had said that this mysterious malady, 
heretofore unknown on earth, would descend from the 
great star, Achemar, which presided balefully over all the 
lands of the southern continent of ; and having 
sealed the flesh of a myriad men with its bright, metallic 
pallor, the plague would still go onward in time and 
space, borne by the dim currents of ether to other worlds. 

Dire was the Silver Death; and none knew the secret of 
its contagion or the cure. Swift as the desert wind, it came 
into Yoros from the devastated realm of Tasuun, overtak 
ing the very messengers who ran by night to give warning 
of its nearness. Those who were smitten felt an icy, freez 
ing cold, an instant rigor, as if the outermost gulf had 
breathed upon them. Their faces and bodies whitened 
strangely, gleaming with a wan luster, and became stiff 
as long-dead corpses, all in an interim of minutes. 

In the streets of Silpon and Siloar, and in Faraad, the 
capital of Yoros, the plague passed like an eery, glittering 
light from countenance to countenance under the golden 
lamps; and the victims fell where they were stricken; and 
the deathly brightness remained upon them. 

The loud, tumultuous public carnivals were stilled by 
its passing, and the merrymakers were frozen in frolic 
attitudes. In proud mansions, the wine-flushed revelers 
grew pale amid their garish feasts, and reclined in their 



  

opulent chairs, still holding the half-emptied cups with 
rigid fingers. Merchants lay in their countinghouses on 
the heaped coins they had begun to reckon; and thieves, 
entering later, were unable to depart with their booty. 
Diggers died in the half-completed graves they had dug 
for others; but no one came to dispute their possession. 

There was no time to flee from the strange, inevitable 
scourge. Dreadfully and quickly, beneath the clear stars, 
it breathed upon Yoros; and few were they who awak 
ened from slumber at dawn. Fulbra, the young king of 
Yoros, who had but newly succeeded to the throne, was 
virtually a ruler without a people. 

Fulbra had spent the night of the plague’s advent on a 
high tower of his palace above Faraad: an observatory 
tower, equipped with astronomical. appliances. A great 
heaviness had lain on his heart, and his thoughts were 
dulled with an opiate despair; but sleep was remote from 
his eyelids. He knew the many predictions that foretold the 
Silver Death; and moreover he had read its imminent 
coming in the stars, with the aid of the old astrologer and 
sorcerer, Vemdeez. This latter knowledge he and Vem- 
deez had not cared to promulgate, knowing full well that 
the doom of Yoros was a thing decreed from all time by 
infinite destiny; and that no man could evade the doom, 
unless it were written that he should die in another way 
than this. 

Now Vemdeez had cast the horoscope of Fulbra; and 
though he found therein certain ambiguities that his sci 
ence could not resolve, it was nevertheless written plainly 
that the king would not die in Yoros. Where he would 
die, and in what manner, were alike doubtful. But Vem 
deez, who had served Altath the father of Fulbra, and 
was no less devoted to the new ruler, had wrought by 
means of his magical art an enchanted ring that would 
protect Fulbra from the Silver Death in all times and 
places. 

The ring was made of a strange red metal, darker than 
ruddy gold or copper, and was set with a black and ob 
long gem, not known to terrestrial lapidaries, that gave 
forth eternally a strong, aromatic perfume. The sorcerer 



  

told Fulbra never to remove the ring from the middle 
finger on which he wore it—not even in lands afar from 
Yoros and in days after the passing of the Silver Death: 
for if once the plague had breathed upon Fulbra, he 
would bear its subtle contagion always in his flesh; and 
the contagion would assume its wonted virulence with the 
ring’s removal. But Vemdeez did not tell the origin of the 
red metal and the dark gem, nor the price at which the 
protective magic had been purchased. 

With a sad heart, Fulbra had accepted the ring and 
had worn it; and so it was that the Silver Death blew over 
him in the night and harmed him not. But waiting anx 
iously on the high tower, and watching the golden lights 
of Faraad rather than the white, implacable stars, he felt 
a light, passing chillness that belonged not to the sum 
mer air. And even as it passed the gay noises of the city 
ceased; and the moaning lutes faltered strangely and ex 
pired. A stillness crept on the carnival; and some of the 
lamps went out and were not relit. In the palace beneath 
him there was also silence; and he heard no more the 
laughter of his courtiers and chamberlains. And Vemdeez 
came not, as was his custom, to join Fulbra on the tower 
at midnight. So Fulbra knew himself for a realmless king: 
and the grief that he still felt for the noble Altath was 
swollen by a great sorrow for his perished people. 

Hour by hour he sat motionless, too sorrowful for tears. 
The stars changed above him; and Achemar glared down 
perpetually like the bright, cruel eye of a mocking demon; 
and the heavy balsam of the black-jeweled ring arose to 
his nostrils and seemed to stifle him. And once the 
thought occurred to Fulbra, to cast the ring away and die 
as his people had died. But his despair was too heavy 
upon him even for this; and so, at length, the dawn came 
slowly in heavens pale as the Silver Death, and found him 
still on the tower. 

In the dawn, King Fulbra rose and descended the 
coiled stairs of porphyry into his palace. And midway on 
the stairs he saw the fallen corpse of the old sorcerer 
Vemdeez, who had died even as he climbed to join his 
master. The wrinkled face of Vemdeez was like polished 



  

metal, and was whiter than his beard and hair; and his 
open eyes, which had been dark as sapphires, were 
frosted with the plague. Then, grieving greatly for the 
death of Vemdeez, whom he had loved as a foster father, 
the king went slowly on. And in the suites and halls 
below, he found the bodies of his courtiers and servants 
and guardsmen. And none remained alive, excepting 
three slaves who warded the green, brazen portals of the 
lower vaults, far beneath the palace. 

Now Fulbra bethought him of the counsel of Vemdeez, 
who had urged him to flee from Yoros and to seek shelter 
in the southern isle of Cyntrom, which paid tribute to the 
kings of Yoros. And though he had no heart for this, 
nor for any course of action, Fulbra bade the three remaining 
slaves to gather food and such other supplies as 
were necessary for a voyage of some length and to carry 
them aboard a royal barge of ebony that was moored at 
the palace porticoes on the river Voum. 

Then, embarking with the slaves, he took the helm of 
the barge, and directed the slaves to unfurl the broad 
amber sail. And past the stately city of Faraad, whose 
streets were thronged with the silvery dead, they sailed on 
the widening jasper estuary of the Voum, and into the 
amaranth-colored gulf of the Indaskian Sea. 

A favorable wind was behind them, blowing from the 
north over desolate Tasuun and Yoros, even as the Silver 
Death had blown in the night. And idly beside them, on 
the Voum, there floated seaward many vessels whose 
crews and captains had all died of the plague. And Fa 
raad was still as a necropolis of old time; and nothing 
stirred on the estuary shores, excepting the plumy, fan- 
shapen palms that swayed southward in the freshening wind. 
And soon the green strand of Yoros receded, gathering to 
itself the blueness and the dreams of distance. 

Creaming with a winy foam, full of strange murmur 
ous voices and vague tales of exotic things, the halcyon 
sea was about the voyagers now beneath the high-lifting 
summer sun. But the sea’s enchanted voices and its long, 
languorous, immeasurable cradling could not soothe the 



  

sorrow of Fulbra; and in his heart a despair abided, black 
as the gem that was set in the red ring of Vemdeez. 

Howbeit, he held the great helm of the ebon barge, and 
steered as straightly as he could by the sun toward Cyn- 
trom. The amber sail was taut with the favoring wind; 
and the barge sped onward all that day, cleaving the 
amaranth waters with its dark prow that reared in the 
carven form of an ebony goddess. And when the night 
came with familiar austral stars, Fulbra was able to cor 
rect such errors as he had made in reckoning the course. 

For many days they flew southward; and the sun low 
ered a little in its circling behind them; and new stars 
climbed and clustered at evening about the black god 
dess of the prow. And Fulbra, who had once sailed to the 
Isle of Cyntrom in boyhood days with his father Altath, 
thought to see ere long the lifting of its shores of camphor 
and sandalwood from the winy deep. But in his heart 
there was no gladness; and often now he was blinded by 
wild tears, remembering that other voyage with Altath. 

Then, suddenly and at high noon, there fell an airless 
calm, and the waters became as purple glass about the 
barge. The sky changed to a dome of beaten copper, 
arching close and low; and as if by some evil wizardry, 
the dome darkened with untimely night, and a tempest 
rose like the gathered breath of migjhty devils and shaped 
the sea into vast ridges and abysmal valleys. The mast of 
ebony snapped like a reed in the wind, and the sail was 
tom asunder, and the helpless vessel pitched headlong in 
the dark troughs and was hurled upward through veils of 
blinding foam to the giddy summits of the billows. 

Fulbra clung to the useless helm, and the slaves, at his 
command, took shelter in the forward cabin. For count 
less hours they were borne onward at the will of the mad 
hurricane; and Fulbra could see naught in the lowering 
gloom, except the pale crests of the beetling waves; and 
he could tell no longer the direction of their course. 

Then, in that lurid dusk, he beheld at intervals another 
vessel that rode the storm-driven sea, not far from the 
barge. He thought that the vessel was a galley such as 
might be used by merchants that voyaged among the 



  

southern isles, trading for incense and plumes and vermil 
ion; but its oars were mostly broken, and the toppled 
mast and sail hung forward on the prow. 

For a time the ships drove on together; till Fulbra saw, 
in a rifting of the gloom, the sharp and somber crags of 
an unknown shore, with sharper towers that lifted palely 
above them. He could not turn the helm; and the barge 
and its companion vessel were carried toward the looming 
rocks, till Fulbra thought that they would crash thereon. 
But, as if by some enchantment, even as it had risen, the 
sea fell abruptly in a windless calm; and quiet sunlight 
poured from a clearing sky; and the barge was left on a 
broad crescent of ocher-yellow sand between the crags 
and the lulling waters, with the galley beside it. 

Dazed and marvelling, Fulbra leaned on the helm, while 
his slaves crept timidly forth from the cabin, and men 
began to appear on the decks of the galley. And the king 
was about to hail these men, some of whom were dressed 
as humble sailors and others in the fashion of rich mer 
chants. But he heard a laughter of strange voices, high 
and shrill and somehow evil, that seemed to fall from 
above; and looking up he saw that many people were descending a sort of stairway in the cliffs that enclosed the 
beach. 

The people drew near, thronging about the barge and 
the galley. They wore fantastic turbans of blood-red, and 
were clad in closely fitting robes of vulturine black. Their 
faces and hands were yellow as saffron; their small and 
slaty eyes were set obliquely beneath lashless lids; and 
their thin lips, which smiled eternally, were crooked as 
the blades of scimitars. 

They bore sinister and wicked-looking weapons, in the 
form of saw-toothed swords and double-headed spears. 
Some of them bowed low before Fulbra and addressed 
him obsequiously, staring upon him all the while with an 
unblinking gaze that he could not fathom. Their speech 
was no less alien than their aspect; it was full of sharp 
and hissing sounds; and neither the king nor his slaves 
could comprehend it. But Fulbra bespoke the people 
courteously, in the mild and mellow-flowing tongue of 



  

Yoros, and inquired the name of this land whereon the 
barge had been cast by the tempest. 

Certain of the people seemed to understand him, for a 
light came in their slaty eyes at his question; and one of 
them answered brokenly in the language of Yoros, saying 
that the land was the Isle of Uccastrog. Then, with some 
thing of covert evil in his smile, this person added that all 
shipwrecked mariners and seafarers would receive a 
goodly welcome from Ildrac, the king of the Isle. 

At this, the heart of Fulbra sank within him; for he 
had heard numerous tales of Uccastrog in bygone years; 
and the tales were not such as would reassure a stranded 
traveler. Uccastrog, which lay far to the east of Cyntrom, 
was commonly known as the Isle of the Torturers; and 
men said that all who landed upon it unaware, or were 
cast thither by the seas, were imprisoned by the inhabi 
tants and were subjected later to unending curious tor 
tures whose infliction formed the chief delight of these 
cruel beings. No man, it was rumored, had ever escaped 
from Uccastrog; but many had lingered for years in its 
dungeons and hellish torture chambers, kept alive for the 
pleasure of King Ildrac and his followers. Also, it was be 
lieved that the Torturers were great magicians who could 
raise mighty storms with their enchantments, and could 
cause vessels to be carried far from the maritime routes, 
and then fling them ashore upon Uccastrog. 

Seeing that the yellow people were all about the barge, 
and that no escape was possible, Fulbra asked them to 
take him at once before King Ildrac. To Ildrac he would 
announce his name and royal rank; and it seemed to him, 
in his simplicity, that one king, even though cruel- 
hearted, would scarcely torture another or keep him cap 
tive. Also, it might be that the inhabitants of Uccastrog 
had been somewhat maligned by the tales of travelers. 

So Fulbra and his slaves were surrounded by certain of 
the throng and were led toward the palace of Ildrac, 
whose high, sharp towers crowned the crags beyond the 
beach, rising above those clustered abodes in which the 
island people dwelt. And while they were climbing the 
hewn steps in the cliff, Fulbra heard a loud outcry below 



  

and a clashing of steel against steel; and looking back, he 
saw that the crew of the stranded galley had drawn their 
swords and were fighting the islanders. But being out 
numbered greatly, their resistance was borne down by the 
swarming Torturers; and most of them were taken alive. 
And Fulbra’s heart misgave him sorely at this sight; and 
more and more did he mistrust the yellow people. 

Soon he came into the presence of Ildrac, who sat on a 
lofty brazen chair in a vast hall of the palace. Ildrac was 
taller by half a head than any of his followers; and his 
features were like a mask of evil wrought from some pale, 
gilded metal; and he was clad in vestments of a strange 
hue, like sea-purple brightened with fresh-flowing blood. 
About him were many guardsmen, armed with terrible 
scythelike weapons; and the sullen, slant-eyed girls of the 
palace, in skirts of vermilion and breast-cups of lazuli, 
went to and fro among huge basaltic columns. About the 
hall stood numerous engineries of wood and stone and 
metal such as Fulbra had never beheld, and having a for 
midable aspect with their heavy chains, their beds of iron 
teeth and their cords and pulleys of fish-skin. 

The young king of Yoros went forward with a royal 
and fearless bearing, and addressed Ildrac, who sat mo 
tionless and eyed him with a level, unwinking gaze. And 
Fulbra told Ildrac his name and station, and the calamity 
that had caused him to flee from Yoros; and he men 
tioned also his urgent desire to reach the Isle of Cyntrom. 

“It is a long voyage to Cyntrom,” said Ildrac, with a 
subtle smile. “Also, it is not our custom to permit guests 
to depart without having fully tasted the hospitality of the 
Isle of Uccastrog. Therefore, King Fulbra, I must beg you 
to curb your impatience. We have much to show you 
here, and many diversions to offer. My chamberlains will 
now conduct you to a room befitting your royal rank. But 
first I must ask you to leave with me the sword that you 
carry at your side; for swords are often sharp—and I do 
not wish my guests to suffer injury by their own hands.” 

So Fulbra’s sword was taken from him by one of the 
palace guardsmen; and a small ruby-hilted dagger that he 
carried was also removed. Then several of the guards, 



  

hemming him in with their scythed weapons, led him 
from the hall and by many corridors and downward 
flights of stairs into the solid rock beneath the palace. 
And he knew not wither his three slaves were taken, or 
what disposition was made of the captured crew of the 
galley. And soon he passed from the daylight into cavern 
ous halls illumed by sulfur-colored flames in copper cres 
sets; and all around him, in hidden chambers, he heard 
the sound of dismal moans and loud, maniacal howlings 
that seemed to beat and die upon adamantine doors. 

In one of these halls, Fulbra and his guardsmen met a 
young girl, fairer and less sullen of aspect than the others; 
and Fulbra thought that the girl smiled upon him com 
passionately as he went by; and it seemed that she mur 
mured faintly in the language of Yoros: “Take heart, 
King Fulbra, for there is one who would help you.” And 
her words, apparently, were not heeded or understood by 
the guards, who knew only the harsh and hissing tongue 
of Uccastrog. 

After descending many stairs, they came to a ponder 
ous door of bronze; and the door was unlocked by one of 
the guards, and Fulbra was compelled to enter; and the 
door clanged dolorously behind him. 

The chamber into which he had been thrust was walled 
on three sides with the dark stone of the island, and was 
walled on the fourth with heavy, unbreakable glass. Be 
yond the glass he saw the blue-green, glimmering waters 
of the undersea, lit by the hanging cressets of the cham 
ber; and in the waters were great devil-fish whose tenta 
cles writhed along the wall; and huge pythonomorphs 
with fabulous golden coils receding in the gloom; and the 
floating corpses of men that stared in upon him with eye 
balls from which the lids had been excised. 

There was a couch in one comer of the dungeon, close 
to the wall of glass; and food and drink had been sup 
plied for Fulbra in vessels of wood. The king laid himself 
down, weary and hopeless, without tasting the food. 
Then, lying with close-shut eyes while the dead men and 
the sea monsters peered in upon him by the glare of the 
cressets, he strove to forget his griefs and the dolorous 



  

doom that impended. And through his clouding terror 
and sorrow, he seemed to see the comely face of the girl 
who had smiled upon him compassionately, and who, 
alone of all that he had met in Uccastrog, had spoken to 
him with words of kindness. The face returned ever and 
anon, with a soft haunting, a gentle sorcery; and Fulbra 
felt, for the first time in many suns, the dim stirring of his 
buried youth and the vague, obscure desire of life. So, 
after a while, he slept; and the face of the girl came still 
before him in his dreams. 

The cressets burned above him with undiminished 
flames when he awakened; and the sea beyond the wall of 
gjass was thronged with the same monsters as before, or 
with others of the kind. But amid the floating corpses he 
now beheld the flayed bodies of his own slaves, who, after 
being tortured by the island people, had been cast forth 
into the submarine cavern that adjoined his dungeon, so 
that he might see them on awakening. 

He sickened with new horror at the sight; but even as 
he stared at the dead faces, the door of bronze swung open 
with a sullen grinding, and his guards entered. Seeing that 
he had not consumed the food and water provided for 
him, they forced him to eat and drink a little, menacing 
him with their broad, crooked blades till he complied. 
And then they led him from the dungeon and took him 
before King Hdrac, in the great hall of tortures. 

Fulbra saw, by the level golden light through the pal 
ace windows and the long shadows of the columns and 
machines of torment, that the time was early dawn. The 
hall was crowded with the Torturers and their women; 
and many seemed to look on while others, of both sexes, 
busied themselves with ominous preparations. And Ful 
bra saw that a tall brazen statue, with cruel and demo- 
nian visage, like some implacable god of the underworld, 
was now standing at the right hand of Ddrac where he sat 
aloft on his brazen chair. 

Fulbra was thrust forward by his guards, and Hdrac 
greeting him briefly, with a wily smile that preceded the 
words and lingered after them. And when Hdrac had spo 
ken, the brazen image also began to speak, addressing 



  

Fulbra in the language of Yoros, with strident and metal 
lic tones, and telling him with full and minute circum 
stance the various infernal tortures to which he was to be 
subjected on that day. 

When the statue had done speaking, Fulbra heard a 
soft whisper in his ear, and saw beside him the fair girl 
whom he had previously met in the nether corridors. And 
the girl, seemingly unheeded by the Torturers, said to 
him: “Be courageous, and endure bravely all that is in 
flicted; for I shall effect your release before another day, 
if this be possible.” 

Fulbra was cheered by the girl’s assurance; and it 
seemed to him that she was fairer to look upon than be 
fore; and he thought that her eyes regarded him tenderly; 
and the twin desires of love and life were strangely resur 
rected in his heart, to fortify him against the tortures of 
Hdrac. 

Of that which was done to Fulbra for the wicked plea 
sure of King Ildrac and his people, it were not well to 
speak fully. For the islanders of Uccastrog had designed 
innumerable torments, curious and subtle, wherewith to 
harry and excruciate the five senses; and they could harry 
the brain itself, driving it to extremes more terrible than 
madness; and could take away the dearest treasures of 
memory and leave unutterable foulness in their place. 

On that day, however, they did not torture Fulbra to 
the uttermost. But they racked his ears with cacophonous 
sounds; with evil flutes that chilled the blood and curdled 
it upon his heart; with deep drums that seemed to ache in 
all his tissues; and thin tabors that wrenched his very 
bones. Then they compelled him to breathe the mounting 
fumes of braziers wherein the dried gall of dragons and the 
adipocere of dead cannibals were burned together with a 
fetid wood. Then, when the fire had died down, they 
freshened it with the oil of vampire-bats; and Fulbra 
swooned, unable to bear the fetor any longer. 

Later, they stripped away his kingly vestments and fas 
tened about his body a silken girdle that had been freshly 
dipt in an acid corrosive only to human flesh; and the 
acid ate slowly, fretting his skin with infinite fiery pangs. 



  

Then, after removing the girdle lest it slay him, the 
Torturers brought in certain creatures that had the shape 
of ell-long serpents, but were covered from head to tail 
with sable hairs like those of a caterpillar. And these 
creatures twined themselves tightly about the arms and legs 
of Fulbra; and though he fougjit wildly in his revulsion, 
he could not loosen them with his hands; and the hairs 
that covered their constringent coils began to pierce his 
limbs like a million tiny needles, till he screamed with the 
agony. And when his breath failed him and he could 
scream no longer, the hairy serpents were induced to relinquish 
their hold by a languorous piping of which the 
islanders knew the secret. They dropped away and left 
him; but the mark of their coils was imprinted redly 
about his limbs; and around his body there burned the 
raw branding of the girdle. 

King Hdrac and his people looked on with a dreadful 
gloating; for in such things they took their joy, and strove 
to pacify an implacable obscure desire. But seeing now 
that Fulbra could endure no more, and wishing to wreak 
their will upon him for many future days, they took him 
back to his dungeon. 

Lying sick with remembered horror, feverish with pain, 
he longed not for the clemency of death, but hoped for 
the coming of the girl to release him as she had promised. 
The long hours passed with a half-delirious tedium; and 
the cressets, whose flames had been changed to crimson, 
appeared to fill his eyes with flowing blood; and the dead 
men and the sea monsters swam as if in blood beyond the 
wall of glass. And the girl came not; and Fulbra had 
begun to despair. Then, at last, he heard the door open 
gently and not with the harsh clangor that had pro 
claimed the entrance of his guards. 

Turning, he saw the girl, who stole swiftly to his couch 
with a lifted fingertip, enjoining silence. She told him with 
soft whispers that her plan had failed; but surely on the 
following night she would be able to drug the guards and 
obtain the keys of the outer gates; and Fulbra could es 
cape from the palace to a hidden cove in which a boat 
with water and provisions lay ready for his use. She 



  

prayed him to endure for another day the torments of H- 
drac; and to this, perforce, he consented. And he thought 
that the girl loved him; for tenderly she caressed his fe 
verous brow, and rubbed his torture-burning limbs with a 
soothing ointment. He deemed that her eyes were soft 
with a compassion that was more than pity. So Fulbra be 
lieved the girl and trusted her, and took heart against the 
horror of the coming day. Her name, it seemed, was 
Hvaa; and her mother was a woman of Yoros who had 
married one of the evil islanders, choosing this repugnant 
union as an alternative to the flaying-knives of Ildrac. 

Too soon the girl went away, pleading the great danger 
of discovery, and closed the door softly upon Fulbra. 
And after a while the king slept; and Ilvaa returned to 
him amid the delirious abominations of his dreams, and 
sustained him against the terror of strange hells. 

At dawn the guards came with their hooked weapons, 
and led him again before Ildrac. And again the brazen, 
demoniac statue, in a strident voice, announced the fear 
ful ordeals that he was to undergo. And this time he saw 
that other captives, including the crew and merchants of 
the galley, were also awaiting the malefic ministrations of 
the Torturers in the vast hall. 

Once more in the throng of watchers the girl Ilvaa 
pressed close to him, unreprimanded by his guards, and 
murmured words of comfort; so that Fulbra was enheart- 
ened against the enormities foretold by the brazen oracu 
lar image. And indeed a bold and hopeful heart was required 
to endure the ordeals of that day . . . 

Among other things less goodly to be mentioned, the 
Torturers held before Fulbra a mirror of strange wiz 
ardry, wherein his own face was reflected as if seen after 
death. The rigid features, as he gazed upon them, became 
marked with the green and bluish marbling of corruption; 
and the withering flesh fell in on the sharp bones, and 
displayed the visible fretting of the worm. Hearing mean 
while the dolorous groans and agonizing cries of his fel 
low-captives all about the hall, he beheld other faces, 
dead, swollen, lidless, and flayed, that seemed to ap 
proach from behind and to throng about his own face in 



  

the mirror. Their looks were dank and dripping, like the 
hair of corpses recovered from the sea; and seaweed was 
mingled with the locks. Then, turnin g at a cold and 
clammy touch, he found that these faces were no illusion 
but the actual reflection of cadavers drawn from the un 
dersea by a malign sorcery, that had entered the hall of 
Ildrac like living men and were peering over his shoulder. 

His own slaves, with flesh that the sea things had 
gnawed even to the bone, were among them. And the 
slaves came toward him with glaring eyes that saw only 
the voidness of death. And beneath the sorcerous control 
of Ildrac, their evilly animated corpses began to assail 
Fulbra, clawing at Ms face and raiment with half-eaten 
fingers. And Fulbra, faint with loathing, struggled against 
Ms dead slaves, who knew not the voice of their master 
and were deaf as the wheels and racks of torment used by 
Ildrac . . . 

Anon the drowned and dripping corpses went away; 
and Fulbra was stripped by the Torturers and was laid 
supine on the palace floor, with iron rings that bound him 
closely to the flags at knee and wrist, at elbow and ankle. 
Then they brought in the disinterred body of a woman, 
nearly eaten, in wMch a myriad maggots swarmed on the 
uncovered bones and tatters of dark corruption; and tMs 
body they placed on the right hand of Fulbra. And also 
they fetched the carrion of a black goat that was newly 
touched with be ginnin g decay; and they laid it down be 
side him on the left hand. Then, across Fulbra, from right 
to left, the hungry maggots crawled in a long and undu- 
lantwave . . . 

After the consummation of tMs torture, there came 
many others that were equally ingenious and atrocious, 
and were well designed for the delectation of King Ildrac 
and his people. And Fulbra endured the tortures val 
iantly, upheld by the thought of Uvaa. 

Vainly, however, on the night that followed this day, 
he waited in his dungeon for the girl. The cressets burned 
with a bloodier crimson; and new corpses were among 
the flayed and floating dead in the sea cavern; and 
strange double-bodied serpents of the nether deep arose 



 


 


with an endless squirming; and their homed heads ap 
peared to bloat immeasurably against the crystal wall. 
Yet the girl Ilvaa came not to free him as she had prom 
ised; and the night passed. But though despair resumed 
its old dominion in the heart of Fulbra, and terror came 
with talons steeped in fresh venom, he refused to doubt 
Ilvaa, telling himself that she had been delayed or pre 
vented by some unforeseen mishap. 

At dawn of the third day, he was again taken before 
Hdrac. The brazen image, announcing the ordeals of the 
day, told him that he was to be bound on a wheel of ada 
mant; and, lying on the wheel, was to drink a drugged 
wine that would steal away his royal memories for ever, 
and would conduct his naked soul on a long pilgrimage 
through monstrous and infamous hells before bringing it 
back to the hall of Hdrac and the broken body on the 
wheel. 

Then certain women of the Torturers, laughing ob 
scenely, came forward and bound King Fulbra to the 
adamantine wheel with thongs of dragon-gut. And after 
they had done this, the girl Ilvaa, smiling with the shame 
less exultation of open cruelty, appeared before Fulbra 
and stood close beside him, holding a golden cup that 
contained the drugged wine. She mocked him for his folly 
and credulity in trusting her promises; and the other 
women and die male Torturers, even to Ildrac on his bra 
zen seat, laughed loudly and evilly at Fulbra, and praised 
Ilvaa for the perfidy she had practiced upon him. 

So Fulbra’s heart grew sick with a darker despair than 
any he had yet known. The brief, piteous love that had 
been bom amid sorrow and agony perished within him, 
leaving but ashes steeped in gall. Yet, gazing at Ilvaa with 
sad eyes, he uttered no word of reproach. He wished to 
live no longer; and yearning for swift death, he bethought 
him of the wizard ring of Vemdeez and of that which 
Vemdeez had said would follow its removal from his 
finger. He still wore the ring, which the Torturers had 
deemed a bauble of small value. But his hands were 
bound tightly to the wheel, and he could not remove it. 
So, with a bitter cunning, knowing full well that the island- 



  

ers would not take away the ring if he should offer it to 
them, he feigned a sudden madness and cried wildly: 

“Steal my memories, if ye will, with your accursed 
wine—and send me through a thousand hells and bring 
me back again to Uccastrog: but take not the ring that I 
wear on my middle finger; for it is more precious to me 
than many kingdoms or the pale breasts of love.” 

Hearing this, King Ildrac rose from his brazen seat; 
and bidding Uvaa to delay the administration of the wine, 
he came forward and inspected curiously the ring of 
Vemdeez, which gleamed darkly, set with its rayless gem, 
on Fulbra’s finger. And all the while, Fulbra cried out 
against him in a frenzy, as if fearing that he would take 
the ring. 

So Ildrac, deeming that he could plague the prisoner 
thereby and could heighten his suffering a little, did the 
very thing for which Fulbra had planned. And the ring 
came easily from the shrunken finger; and Ildrac, wishing 
to mock the royal captive, placed it on his own middle 
digit. 

Then, while Ildrac regarded the captive with a more 
deeply graven smile of evil on the pale, gilded mask of his 
face, there came to King Fulbra of Yoros the dreadful 
and longed-for thing. The Silver Death, that had slept so 
long in his body beneath the magical abeyance of die ring 
of Vemdeez, was made manifest even as he hung on the 
adamantine wheel. His limbs stiffened with another rigor 
than that of agony; and his face shone brightly with the 
coming of the Death; and so he died. 

Then, to Ilvaa and to many of the Torturers who stood 
wondering about the wheel, the chill and instant conta- 
gion of the Silver Death was communicated. They fell 
even where they had stood; and the pestilence remained 
like a glittering light on the faces and hands of the men 
and shone forth from the nude bodies of the women. And 
the plague passed along the immense hall; and the other 
captives of King Ildrac were released thereby from their 
various torments; and the Torturers found surcease from 
the dire longing that they could assuage only through the 
pain of their fellowmen. And through all the palace, and 



  

throughout the Isle of Uccastrog, the Death flew swiftly, 
visible in those upon whom it had breathed, but otherwise 
unseen and impalpable. 

But Ildrac, wearing the ring of Vemdeez, was immune. 
And guessing not the reason of his immunity, he beheld 
with consternation the doom that had overtaken his fol 
lowers, and watched in stupefaction the freeing of his vic 
tims. Then, fearful of some inimic sorcery, he rushed 
from the hall; and standing in the early sun on a palace 
terrace above the sea, he tore the ring of Vemdeez from 
his finger and hurled it to the foamy billows far below, 
deeming in his terror that the ring was perhaps the source 
or agent of the unknown hostile magic. 

So Ildrac, in his turn, when all the others had fallen, 
was smitten by the Silver Death; and its peace descended 
upon him where he lay in his robes of blood-brightened 
purple, with features shining palely to the unclouded sun. 
And oblivion claimed the Isle of Uccastrog; and the Tor 
turers were one with the tortured. 


The Garden of Adompha 


“Lord of the sultry, red parterres 
And orchards sunned by hell's unsetting flame! 

Amid thy garden blooms the Tree which bears 
Unnumbered heads of demons for its fruit; 

And, like a slithering serpent, runs the root 
That is called Baaras; 

And there the forky, pale mandragoras. 

Self-torn from out the soil, go to and fro, 

Calling upon thy name: 

Till man new-damned will deem that devils pass. 

Crying in wrathful frenzy and strange woe.” 

— Ludar’s Litany to Thasaidon 


It was well known that Adompha, king of the wide ori 
ent Isle of Sotar, possessed ami d his far-stretching palace 



  

grounds a garden secret from all men except himself and 
die court magician, Dwerulas. The square-built granite 
walls of the garden, high and formidable as those of a 
prison, were plain for all to see, rearing above the stately 
beefwood and camphor trees, and broad plots of multicol 
ored blossoms. But nothing had ever been ascertained regarding 
its interior: for such care as it required was given 
only by the wizard beneath Adompha’s direction; and the 
twain spoke thereof in deep riddles that none could inter 
pret. TTie thick brazen door responded to a mechanism 
whose mystery they shared with none other; and the king 
and Dwerulas, whether separately or together, visited the 
garden only at those hours when others were not abroad. 
And none could verily boast that he had beheld even so 
much as the opening of the door. 

Men said that the garden had been roofed over against 
the sun with great sheets of lead and copper, leaving no 
cranny through which the tiniest star could peer down. 
Some swore that the privacy of its masters during their vis 
its was ensured by a lethean slumber which Dwerulas, 
through his magic art, was wont to lay at such times upon 
the whole vicinity. 

A mystery so salient could hardly fail to provoke cu 
riosity, and sundry different beliefs arose concerning the 
garden’s nature. Some averred that it was filled with evil 
plants of nocturnal habit, that yielded their swift and 
mordant poisons for Adompha’s use, along with more in 
sidious and baleful essences employed by the warlock in 
the working of his enchantments. Such tales, it seemed, 
were perhaps not without authority: since, following the 
construction of the closed garden, there had been at the 
royal court numerous deaths attributable to poisoning, 
and disasters that were plainly the sendings of a wizard, 
together with the bodily vanishment of people whose 
mundane presence no longer pleased Adompha or Dwer 
ulas. 

Other tales, of a more extravagant kind, were whis 
pered among the credulous. That legend of unnatural in 
famy, which had surrounded the king from childhood, as 
sumed a more hideous tinge; and Dwerulas, who had re- 



  

putedly been sold to the Archdemon before birth by his 
haggish mother, acquired a new blackness of renown as 
one exceeding all other sorcerers in the depth and stark 
ness of his abandonment. 

Waking from such slumber and such dreams as the 
juice of the black poppy had given him, King Adompha 
rose in the dead, stagnant hours between moonset and 
dawn. About him the palace lay hushed like a charnel 
house, its occupants having yielded to their nightly sopor 
of wine, drugs and arrack. Around the palace, the gardens 
and the capital city of Loithe slept beneath the slow stars 
of windless, southern heavens. At this time Adompha and 
Dwerulas were wont to visit the high-walled close with lit 
tle fear of being followed or observed. 

Adompha went forth, pausing but briefly to turn the 
covert eye of his black bronze lantern into the lampless 
chamber adjoining his own. The room had been occupied 
by Thuloneah, his favorite odalisque for the seldom- 
equaled period of eight nights; but he saw without surprise 
or disconcertion that the bed of disordered silks was now 
empty. By this, he felt sure that Dwerulas had preceded 
him to the garden. And he knew, moreover, that Dweru 
las had not gone idly or unburdened. 

The grounds of the palace, steeped everywhere in un 
broken shadow, appeared to maintain that secrecy which 
the king preferred. He came to the shut brazen door in 
the blankly towering granite wall; emitting, as he ap 
proached it, a sharp sibilation like the hissing of a cobra. 
In response to the rising and falling of this sound, the 
door swung inward silently, and closed silently behind 
him. 

The garden, planted and tilled so privily, and sealed by 
its metal roof from the orbs of heaven, was illumined 
solely by a strange fiery globe that hung in mid-air at the 
center. Adompha regarded this globe with awe, for its na 
ture and purveyance were mysterious to him. Dwerulas 
claimed that it had risen from hell on a moonless mid 
night at his bidding, and was levitated by infernal power, 
and fed with the never-dying flames of that clime in 
which the fruits of Thasaidon swelled to unearthly size 



  

and enchanted savor. It gave forth a sanguine light, in 
which the garden swam and weltered as if seen through a 
luminous mist of blood. Even in the bleak nights of win 
ter, the globe yielded a genial warmth; and it fell never 
from its weird suspension, though without palpable sup 
port; and beneath it the garden flourished balefully, lush 
and exuberant as some parterre of the nether circles. 

Indeed, the growths of that garden were such as no 
terrestrial sun could have fostered, and Dwerulas said 
that their seed was of like origin with the globe. There 
were pale, bifurcated trunks that strained upward as if to 
disroot themselves from the ground, unfolding immense 
leaves like the dark and ribbed wings of dragons. There 
were amaranthine blossoms, broad as salvers, supported 
by arm-thick stems that trembled continually. 

And there were many other weird plants, diverse as the 
seven hells, and having no common characteristics other 
than the scions which Dwerulas had grafted upon them 
here and there through his unnatural and necromantic 
art. 

These scions were the various parts and members of 
human beings. Consumately, and with never-failing suc 
cess, the magician had joined them to the half-vegetable, 
half-animate stocks, on which they lived and grew there 
after, drawing an ichor-like sap. Thus were preserved the 
carefully chosen souvenirs of a multitude of persons who 
had inspired Dwerulas and the king with distaste or 
ennui. On palmy boles, beneath feathery-tufted foliage, 
the heads of enunuchs hung in bunches, like enormous 
black drupes. A bare, leafless creeper was flowered with 
the ears of delinquent guardsmen. Misshapen cacti were 
fruited with the breasts of women, or foliated with their 
hair. Entire limbs or torsos had been united with mon 
strous trees. Some of the huge salver-like blossoms bore 
palpitating hearts, and certain smaller blooms were cen 
tered with eyes that still opened and closed amid their 
lashes. And there were other graftings, too obscene or repellent 
for narration. 

Adompha went forward among the hybrid growths, 
which stirred and rustled at his approach. The heads ap- 



  

peared to crane toward him a little, the ears quivered, the 
breasts shuddered lightly, the eyes widened or narrowed 
as if watching his progress. These human remnants, he 
knew, lived only with the sluggish life of the plants, 
shared only in their sub-animal activity. He had regarded 
them with a curious and morbid esthetic pleasure, had 
found in them the infallible attraction of things enormous 
and hypematural. Now, for the first time, he passed 
among them with a languid interest. He began to appre 
hend that fatal hour when the garden, with all its novel 
thaumaturgies, would offer no longer a refuge from his 
inexorable ennui. 

At the core of the strange pleasance, where a circular 
space was still vacant amid the crowding growths, Adom- 
pha came to a mound of loamy, fresh-dug earth. Beside 
it, wholly nude, and pale and supine as if in death, there 
lay the odalisque Ihuloneah. Near her, various knives 
and other implements, together with vials of liquid bal 
sams and viscid gums that Dwerulas used in his grafting, 
had been emptied upon the ground from a leathern bag. 
A plant known as the dedaim, with a bulbous, pulpy, 
whitish-green bole from whose center rose and radiated 
several leafless reptilian boughs, dripped upon Thulo- 
neah’s bosom an occasional drop of yellowish-red ichor 
from incisions made in its smooth bark. 

Behind the loamy mound, Dwerulas rose to view with 
the suddenness of a demon emerging from his subterrene 
lair. In his hands he held the spade with which he had 
just finished digging a deep and gravelike hole. Beside the 
regal stature and girth of Adompha, he seemed no more 
than a wizened dwarf. His aspect bore all the marks of 
immense age, as if dusty centuries had sered his flesh and 
sucked the blood from his veins. His eyes glowed in the 
bottom of pitlike orbits; his features were black and 
sunken as those of a long-dead corpse; his body was 
gnarled as some millennial desert cedar. He stooped in 
cessantly, so that his lank, knotty arms hung almost to 
the ground. Adompha marveled, as always, at the well- 
nigh demoniac strength of those arms; marveled that 
Dwerulas could have wielded the heavy shovel so expedi- 



  

tiously, could have carried to the garden on his back 
without human aid the burden of those victims whose 
members he had utilized in his experiments. The king had 
never demeaned himself to assist at such labors; but, after 
indicating from time to time the people whose disappear 
ance would in no wise displease him, had done nothing 
more than watch and supervise the baroque gardening. 

“Is she dead?” Adompha questioned, eyeing the luxu 
rious limbs and body of Thuloneah without emotion. 

“Nay,” said Dwerulas, in a voice harsh as a rusty cof 
fin-hinge, “but I have administered to her the drowsy and 
overpowering juice of the declaim. Her heart beats impal- 
pably, her blood flows with the sluggishness of that min 
gled ichor. She will not reawaken . . . save as a part of 
the garden’s life, sharing its obscure sentience. I wait now 
your further instructions. What portion ... or por 
tions?” 

“Her hands were very deft,” said Adompha as if mus 
ing aloud, in reply to the half-uttered question. “They 
knew the subtle ways of love and were learned in all am 
orous arts. I would have you preserve her hands . . . but 
nothing else.” 

The singular and magical operation had been com 
pleted. The fair, slim, tapering hands of Thuloneah, sev 
ered cleanly at the wrists, were attached with little mark 
of suture to the pale and lopped extremities of the two 
topmost branches of the dedaim. In this process the magi 
cian had employed the gums of infernal plants, and had 
repeatedly invoked the curious powers of certain under 
ground genii, as was his wont on such occasions. Now, as 
if in suppliance, the semi-vegetable arms reached out to 
ward Adompha with their human hands. The king felt a 
revival of his old interest in Dwerulas’ horticulture, a 
queer excitement woke with him before the mingled gro- 
tesquery and beauty of the grafted plant. At the same 
time there lived again in his flesh the subtle ardors of out 
worn nights ... for the hands were filled with memories. 

He had quite forgotten Thuloneah’s body, lying close 
by with its maimed arms. Recalled from his revery by the 
sudden movement of Dwerulas, he turned and saw the 



  

wizard stooping above the unconscious girl, who had not 
stirred during the whole course of the operation. Blood 
still flowed and puddled upon the dark earth from the 
stumps of her wrists. Dwerulas, with that unnatural vigor 
which informed all his movements, seized the odalisque in 
his pipy arms and swung her easily aloft. His air was that 
of a laborer resuming his unfinished task; but he seemed 
to hesitate before casting her into the hole that would 
serve as a grave; where, through seasons warmed and il 
lumined by the hell-drawn globe, her hidden, decaying 
body would feed the roots of that anomalous plant which 
bore her own hands for scions. It was as if he were loath 
to relinquish his voluptuous burden. Adompha, watching 
him curiously, was aware as never before of the stark evil 
and turpitude that flowed like an overwhelming fetor 
from Dwerulas’ hunched body and twisted limbs. 

Deeply as he himself had gone into all manner of iniq 
uities, the king felt a vague revulsion. Dwerulas reminded 
him of a loathsome insect that he had once surprised dur 
ing its ghoulish activities. He remembered how he had 
crushed the insect with a stone . . . and remembering, he 
conceived one of those bold and sudden inspirations that 
had always impelled him to equally sudden action. He 
had not, he told himself, entered the garden with any 
such thought: but the opportunity was too urgent and too 
perfect to be overpassed. The wizard’s back was turned to 
him for the nonce; the arms of the wizard were encum 
bered with their heavy and pulchritudinous load. Snatch 
ing up the iron spade, Adompha brought it down on the 
small, withered head of Dwerulas with a fair amount of 
warlike strength inherited from heroic and piratic ances 
tors. The dwarf, still carrying Thuloneah, toppled forward 
into the deep pit. 

Posing the spade for a second blow if such should be 
necessary, the king waited; but there was neither sound 
nor movement from the grave. He felt a certain surprise 
at having overcome with such ease the formidable magi 
cian, of whose superhuman powers he was half con 
vinced; a certain surprise, too, at his own temerity. Then, 
reassured by his triumph, the king bethought him that he 



  

might try an experiment of his own: since he believed 
himself to have mastered much of Dwerulas’ peculiar skill 
and lore through observation* The head of Dwerulas 
would form a unique and suitable addition to one of the 
garden plants. However, upon peering into the pit, he was 
forced to relinquish this idea: for he saw that he had 
struck only too well and had reduced the sorcerer’s head 
to a state in which it was useless for his experiment, since 
such graftings required a certain integrity of the human 
part or member. 

Reflecting, not without disgust, on the unlooked-for 
frailty of the skulls of magicians, which were easily 
squashed as emus’ eggs, Adompha began to fill the pit 
with loam. The prone body of Dwerulas, the huddled 
form of Thuloneah beneath it, sharing the same inertness, 
were soon covered from view by the soft and dissolving 
clods. The king, who had grown to fear Dwerulas in his 
heart, was aware of a distinct relief when he had tamped 
the grave down very firmly and had leveled it smoothly 
with the surrounding soil. He told himself that he had 
done well: for the magician’s stock of learning had come 
latterly to include too many royal secrets; and power such 
as his, whether drawn from nature or from occult realms, 
was never quite compatible with the secure dominion and 
prolonged empire of kings. 

At Kang Adompha’s court and throughout the sea-bor 
dering city of Loithe, the vanishment of Dwerulas became 
the cause of much speculation but little inquiry. There 
was a division of opinion as to whether Adompha or the 
fiend Thasaidon could be thanked for so salutary a rid 
dance; and in consequence, the king of Sotar and the lord 
of the seven hells were both feared and respected as 
never before. Only the most redoubtable of men or demons could have made away with Dwerulas, who was said 
to have lived through a whole millenium never sleeping 
for one night, and crowding all his hours with iniquities 
and sorceries of a sub-tartarean blackness. 

Following the inhumation of Dwerulas, a dim senti 
ment of fear and horror, for which he could not alto 
gether account, had prevented the king from revisiting the 



  

sealed garden. Smiling impassively at the wild rumors of 
the court, he continued his search for novel pleasures and 
violent or rare sensations. In this, however, he met with 
small success: it seemed that every path, even the most 
outre and tortuous, led only to the hidden precipice of 
boredom. Turning from strange loves and cruelties, from 
extravagant pomps and mad music; from the aphrodisiac 
censers of far-sought blossoms, the quaintly shapen 
breasts of exotic girls, he recalled with new longing those 
semi-animate floral forms that had been endowed by 
Dweralas with the most provocative charms of women. 

So, on a latter night, at an hour midway between 
moonfall and sunrise, when all the palace and the city of 
Loithe were plunged in sodden slumber, the king arose 
from beside his concubine and went forth to the garden 
that was now secret from all men excepting himself. 

In answer to the cobra-like sibilation, which alone 
could actuate its cunning mechanism, the door opened to 
Adompha and closed behind him. Even as it closed, he 
grew aware that a singular change had come upon the 
garden during his absence. Burning with a bloodier light, 
a more torrid radiation, the mysterious air-hung globe 
glared down as if fanned by wrathful demons; and the 
plants, which had grown excessively in height, and were 
muflled and hodded with a heavier foliage than they had 
worn prioriy, stood motionless amid an atmosphere that 
was like the heated breath of some crimson hell. 

Adompha hesitated, doubtful of the meaning of these 
changes. For a moment he thought of Dwerulas, and recalled 
with a slight shiver certain unexplained prodigies 
and necromantic feats performed by the wizard. . . . But 
he had slain Dwerulas and had buried him with his own 
royal hands. The waxing heat and radiance of the globe, 
the excessive growth of the garden, were no doubt due to 
some uncontrolled natural process. 

Held by a strong curiosity, the king inhaled the gid 
dying perfumes that came to assail his nostrils. The light 
dazzled his eyes, filling them with queer, unheard-of col 
ors; the heat smote upon him as if from a nether solstice 
of infernal summer. He thought that he heard voices, al- 



  

most inaudible at first, but mounting anon to a half-artic 
ulate murmur that seduced his ear with unearthly sweet 
ness. At the same time he seemed to behold amid the stir 
less vegetation, in flashing glimpses, the half-veiled limbs 
of dancing bayaderes; limbs that he could not identify 
with any of the graftings made by Dwerulas. 

Drawn by the charm of mystery and seized by a vague 
intoxication, the Icing went forward into the hell-bom lab 
yrinth. The plants recoiled gently when he neared them, 
and drew back on either side to permit his passage. As if 
in arboreal masquerade, they seemed to hide their human 
scions behind the mantles of their new-grown leafage. 
Then, closing behind Adompha, they appeared to cast off 
their disguise, revealing wilder and more anomalous fu 
sions than he had remembered. They changed about him 
from instant to instant like shapes of delirium, so that he 
was never quite sure how much of their semblance was 
tree and flower, how much was woman and man. By 
turns he beheld a swinging of convulsed foilage, a com 
motion of riotous limbs and bodies. Then, by some undis- 
cemed transition, it seemed that they were no longer 
rooted in the ground but were moving about him on dim, 
fantastic feet, in ever-swiftening circles, like the dancers 
of some bewildering festival 

Around and around Adompha raced the forms that 
were both floral and human; till the dizzy madness of 
their motion swirled with an equal vertigo through his 
brain. He heard the soughing of a storm-driven forest, to 
gether with a clamoring of familiar voices that called him 
by name, that cursed or supplicated, mocked or exhorted, 
in myriad tones of warrior, councilor, slave, courtling, 
castrado or leman. Over all, the sanguine globe blazed 
down with an ever-brightening and more baleful efful 
gence, an ardor that became always more insupportable. 
It was as if the whole life of the garden turned and rose 
and flamed ecstatically to some infernal c ulminat ion. 

King Adompha had lost all memory of Dwerulas and 
his dark magic. In his senses burned the ardor of the 
hell-risen orb, and he seemed to share the delirious mo 
tion and ecstasy of those obscure shapes by which he was 



  

surrounded. A mad ichor mounted in his blood; before 
him hovered the vague images of pleasures he had never 
known or suspected: pleasures in which he would pass 
far beyond the ordained limits of mortal sensation. 

Then, amid that whirling phantasmagoria, he heard the 
screeching of a voice that was harsh as some rusty hinge 
on the lifted lid of a sarcophagus. He could not under 
stand the words: but, as if a spell of stillness had been 
uttered, the whole garden resumed immediately a hushed 
and hooded aspect. The king stood in a very stupor: for 
the voice had been that of Dwerulas! He looked about 
him wildly, bemazed and bewildered, seeing only the still 
plants with their mantling of profuse leafage. Before him 
towered a growth which he somehow recognized as the 
dedaim, though its bulb-shaped bole and elongated 
branches had put forth a matted mass of dark, hairlike 
filaments. 

Very slowly and gently, the two topmost branches of 
the dedaim descended till their tips were level with 
Adompha’s face. The slender, tapering hands of Thulo- 
neah emerged from their foilage and began to caress the 
king’s cheeks with that lover-like adroitness which he still 
remembered. At the same moment, he saw the thick hairy 
matting fall apart upon the broad and flattish top of the 
dedaim *s bole; and from it, as if rearing from hunched 
shoulders, the small, wizened head of Dwerulas rose up 
to confront him . . . 

Still gazing in vacuous horror at the crushed and 
blood-clotted cranium, at the features sered and black 
ened as if by centuries, at the eyes that glowed in dark 
pits like embers blown by demons, Adompha had the 
confused impression of a multitude of people that hurled 
themselves upon him from every side. There were no 
longer any trees in that garden of mad minglings and sor- 
cerous transmutations. About him in the fiery air swam 
faces that he recalled only too well: faces now contorted 
with malign rage and the lethal lust of revenge. Through 
an irony which Dwerulas alone could have conceived, the 
soft fingers of Thuloneah continued to caress him, while 



  

he felt the clutching of numberless hands that tore all his 
garments into rags and shredded all his flesh 'with their 
nails. 


The Voyage of King Euvoran 


The crown of the kings of Ustaim was fashioned only 
from the rarest materials that could be procured any 
where. The magically graven gold of its circlet had been 
mined from a huge meteor that fell in the southern isle of 
Cyntrom, shaking the isle from shore to shore with ca 
lamitous earthquake; and the gold was harder and 
brighter than any native gold of Earth, and was change 
able in color from a flamelike red to the yellow of young 
moons. It was set with thirteen jewels, every one of which 
was unique and without fellow even in fable. These jewels 
were a wonder to behold, starring the circlet with strange 
unquiet fires and fulgurations terrible as the eyes of the 
cockatrice. But more wonderful than all else was the 
stuffed gazolba-bird which formed the superstructure of 
the crown, gripping the circlet with its steely claws above 
the wearer’s brow, and towering royally with resplendent 
plumage of green, violet and vermilion. Its beak was the 
hue of burnished brass, its eyes were like small dark garnets 
in bezels of silver; and seven lacy, miniated quills 
arose from its ebon-dappled head, and a white tail fell 
down in a straightly spreading fan like the beams of some 
white sun behind the circle. The gazolba-bird was the last 
of its kind, according to the mariners who had slain it in 
an almost legendary isle beyond Sotar, far to the east of 
. For nine generations it had decked the crown 
of Ustaim, and the kings looked upon it as the sacred em 
blem of their fortunes, and a talisman inseparable from 
their royalty, whose loss would be followed by grave dis 
aster. 



  

Euvoran, the son of Karpoom, was the ninth wearer of 
the crown. Superbly and magnificently he had worn it for 
two years and ten months, following the death of Kar 
poom from a surfeit of stuffed eels and jellied salaman 
ders’ eggs. On all state occasions, levees, and daily grant 
ings of public audience and administerings of justice, it 
had graced the brow of the young king and had conferred 
upon him a dreadful majesty in the eyes of the beholders. 
Also, it had served to conceal the lamentable increase of 
an early baldness. 

It came to pass, in the late autumn of the third year of 
his reign, that King Euvoran rose from a goodly breakfast 
of twelve courses and twelve wines, and went forth as was 
his custom to the hall of justice, which occupied an entire 
wing of his palace in the city of Aramoam, looking down 
in several-colored marble from its palmy hills to the rip 
pled lazuli of the orient ocean. 

Being well fortified by his breakfast, Euvoran felt him 
self prepared to unravel the most involute skeins of legal 
ity and crime, and was likewise ready for the meting of 
swift punishment to all malefactors. And beside him, at 
the right arm of his kraken-sculptured throne of ivory, 
there stood an executioner leaning on a huge mace with a 
leaden head that was tempered to the hardness of iron. 
Full often, with this mace, the bones of the more flagi 
tious offenders were broken immediately, or their brains 
were spilt in the king’s presence on a floor that was 
strewn with black sand. And beside the right arm of the 
throne, a professional torturer busied himself continually 
with the screws and pulleys of certain fearsome instru 
ments of torture, as a warning of their fate to all evildo 
ers. And not always idle were the turnings of these screws 
and the tightenings of these pulleys, and not always 
empty were the metal beds of the machines. 

Now, on that morning, the constables of the city 
brought before King Euvoran only a few petty thieves 
and suspicious vagrants; and there were no cases of fel 
ony such as would have warranted the wielding of the 
mace or the use of the torture implements. So the king, 



  

who had looked forward to a pleasurable session, was 
somewhat balked and disappointed; and he questioned 
with much severity the minor culprits before him, trying 
to extort from each of them, in turn, an admission of 
some graver crime than that whereof he was accused. But 
it seemed that the pilferers were innocent of aught but 
pilfering; and the vagrants were guilty of naught worse 
than vagrancy; and Euvoran began to think that the 
morning would offer scant entertainment. For the basti 
nado was the heaviest punishment that he could legally 
impose on such misdemeanants. 

“Away with these mackerel!” he roared to the officers, 
and his crown shook with indignation, and the tall gazol- 
ba-bird on the crown appeared to nod and bow. “Away 
with them, for they pollute my presence. Give each of 
them a hundred strokes with the hardwood briar on the 
bare sole of each foot, and forget not the heels. Then 
drive them forth from Aramoam toward the public ref 
use grounds, and prod them with red-hot tridents if they 
linger in their crawling.” 

Then, ere the officers could obey him, there entered the 
hall of justice two belated constables, haling between 
them a peculiar and most unsavory individual with the 
long-handled, many-pointed hooks that were used in Ara 
moam for the apprehending of malefactors and suspects. 
And though the hooks were seemingly embedded in his 
flesh as well as in the filthy rags that served him for rai 
ment, the prisoner bounded perpetually aloft in the man 
ner of a goat, and his captors were obliged to follow him 
in these lively and undignified saltations, so that the three 
presented the appearance of tumblers. With a final volita- 
tion in which the officers were drawn through the air like 
the tails of a kite, the incredible personage came to a 
pause before Euvoran. The king regarded him in amaze 
ment, blinking rapidly, and was not prepossessed by the 
singular suppleness with which he louted to the very 
floor, upsetting the scarce-covered equilibrium of the 
officers, and causing them to sprawl at full length in the 
royal presence. 



  

“Ha! what have we now?” said the king in an ominous 
voice. 

“Sire, ’tis another vagabond,” replied the breathless of 
ficers, when they had regained a more respectfully in 
clined position. “He would have passed through Ara- 
moam by the main avenue in the fashion that you behold, 
without stopping, and without even lessening the altitude 
of his saltations, if we had not arrested him.” 

“Such behavior is highly suspicious,” growled Euvoran 
hopefully. “Prisoner, declare your name, your nativity 
and occupation, and the infamous crimes of which, be 
yond doubt, you are guilty.” 

The captive, who was cross-eyed, appeared to regard 
Euvoran, the royal mace-wielder, and the royal torturer 
and his instruments all in a single glance. He was ill-fa 
vored to an extravagant degree, his nose, ears and other 
features were all possessed of unnatural mobility, and he 
grimaced perpetually in a manner that caused his unclean 
beard to toss and curl like seaweed on a boiling whirl 
pool. 

“I have many names,” he replied, in an insolent voice 
whose pitch was peculiarly disagreeable to Euvoran, set 
ting his teeth on edge like the grating of metal upon glass. 
“As for my nativity and occupation, the knowledge of 
these, O king, would profit you little.” 

“Sirrah, you are malapert. Give answer, or tongues of 
red-hot iron shall question you,” roared Euvoran. 

“Be it known to you, then, that I am a necromancer, 
and was bom in that realm where the dawn and the sun 
set come together, and the moon is equal in brightness to 
the sun.” 

“Ha! a necromancer!” snorted the king. “Know you 
not that necromancy is a capital crime in Ustaim? Verily, 
we shall find means to dissuade you from the practice of 
such infamies.” 

At a sign from Euvoran, the officers drew their captive 
toward the instruments of torture. Much to their surprise, 
in view of his former ebullience, he allowed himself to be 
chained supinely on the iron bed that produced a remark- 



  

able elongation of the limbs of its occupants. The official 
engineer of these miracles began to work the levers, and 
the bed lengthened little by little with a surly grating, till 
it seemed that the prisoner’s joints would be tom apart. 
Inch by inch was added to his stature; and though, after a 
time, he had gained more than a half-cubit from the 
stretching, he appeared to experience no discomfort what 
ever; and, to the stupefaction of all present, it became 
plain that the elasticity of his arms, legs and body was be 
yond the extensibility of the rack itself: for the latter was 
now drawn to its limit. 

All were silent, viewing this prodigy; and Euvoran rose 
from his seat and went over to the rack, as if doubtful of 
his own eyes that testified to a thing so enormous. And 
the prisoner said to him: 

“It were well to release me, O King Euvoran.” 

“Say you so?” the king cried out in a rage. “However, 
it is not thus that we deal with felons in Ustaim.” And he 
made a private sign to the executioner, who came for 
ward quickly, rearing his massive, leaden-headed mace 
aloft. 

“On your own head be it,” said the necromancer, and 
he rose instantly from the iron bed, breaking the bonds 
that held him, as if they had been chains of grass. Then, 
towering to a terrible height, which the wrenchings of the 
rack had given him, he pointed his long forefinger, dark 
and sere as that of a mummy, at the king’s crown; and 
simultaneously he uttered a foreign word that was shrill 
and eldritch as the crying of migrant fowl that pass over 
toward unknown shores in the night. And, lo! as if in 
answer to that word, there was a loud, sudden flapping of 
wings above Euvoran’s head, and the king felt that his 
brow was lightened of the crown’s goodly and well-accus 
tomed weight. A shadow fell upon him, and he, and all 
who were present, beheld above them in the air the 
stuffed gazolba-bird, which had been slain more than two 
hundred years before by seafaring men in a remote isle. 
The wings of the bird, a living splendor, were outspread 
as if for flight, and it carried still in its steely claws the 



  

rare circlet of the crown. Librating, it hung for a little 
over the throne, while the king watched it in wordless 
awe and consternation. Then, with metallic whirring, its 
white tail deployed like the beams of a flying sun, it flew 
swiftly through the open portals, and passed seaward 
from Aramoam into the morning light. 

After it, with great bounds and goatish leapings, the 
necromancer followed; and no man tried to deter him. 
But those who saw him depart from the city swore that 
he went north along the ocean strand, while the bird flew 
directly eastward, as if homing to the half-fabulous isle of 
its nativity. Thereafter, as if he had gone at a single 
bound into alien realms, the necromancer was not seen in 
Ustaim. But the crew of a merchant galley from Sotar, 
landing later in Aramoam, told how the gazolba-bird had 
passed over them in mid-main, a several-colored glory 
still flying toward the sources of the dayspring. And they 
said that the crown of changeable gold, with its thirteen 
fellowless gems, was still carried by the bird. And though 
they had trafficked long in the archipelagoes of wonder, 
and had seen many prodigies, they deemed this thing a 
most rare and unexampled portent. 

King Euvoran, so strangely reft of that avian headgear, 
with his baldness rudely bared to the gaze of thieves and 
vagrants in the hall of justice, was as one on whom the 
gods have sent down a sudden bolt. If the sun had turned 
black in heaven, or his palace walls had crumbled about 
him, his dumfoundment would hardly have been more 
excessive. For it seemed to him that his royalty had flown 
with that crown which was the emblem and the talisman 
of his fathers. And, moreover, the thing was wholly 
against nature, and the laws of god and man were an 
nulled thereby: since never before, in all history or fable, 
had a dead bird taken flight from the kingdom of Ustaim. 

Indeed, the loss was a dire calamity, and Euvoran, 
having donned a voluminous turban of purple samite, 
held council with his sagest ministers regarding the state 
dilemma that had thus arisen. The ministers were no less 
troubled and perplexed than the king: for the bird and 



  

the circlet were both irreplaceable. And in the meanwhile, 
the rumor of this misfortune was borne abroad through 
Ustain, and the land became filled with lamentable doubt 
and confusion, and some of the people began to murmur 
covertly against Euvoran, saying that no man could be 
the rightful ruler of that country without the gazolba- 
crown. 

Then, as was the custon t of the kings in a time of na 
tional exigence, Euvoran repaired to the temple in which 
dwelt the god Geol, who was a terrestrial god and the 
chief deity of Aramoam. Alone, with bare head and un 
shod feet, as was ordained by hierarchal law, he entered 
the dim adytum where the image of Geol, potbellied, 
and wrought of earth-brown faience, reclined eternally on 
its back and regarded the motes in a narrow beam of sun 
light from the slotted wall. And, falling prone in the dust 
that had gathered about the idol through ages, the king 
gave homage to Geol and implored an oracle to illumi 
nate and guide him in his need. And, after an interim, a 
voice issued from the god’s navel, as if a subterrene rum 
bling had become articulate. And the voice said to King 
Euvoran: 

“Go forth, and seek the gazolba in those isles that lie 
beneath the orient sun. There, O king, on the far coasts 
of dawn, thou shalt again behold the living bird which is 
the symbol and the fortune of thy dynasty; and there, 
with thine own hand, thou shalt slay the bird.” 

Euvoran was much comforted by this oracle, since the 
utterances of the god were deemed infallible. And it 
seemed to him that the oracle implied in plain terms that 
he should recover the lost crown of Ustaim, which had 
the reanimated bird for its superstructure. So, returning 
to the royal palace, he sent for the captains of his proud 
est argosies of war, which lay then at anchor in the tran 
quil harbor of Aramoam, and ordered them to make 
immediate provision for a long voyage into the East and 
among the archipelagoes of morning. 

When all was made ready, King Euvoran went aboard 
the flagship of the fleet, which was a towering quadrireme 
with oars of beefwood and sails of stout-woven byssus 



  

dyed in yellowish scarlet, and a long gonfalon at the 
masthead, bearing the gazolba-bird in its natural colors 
on a field of heavenly cobalt. The rowers and sailors of 
the quadrireme were mighty negroes from the north; and 
the soldiers who manned it were fierce mercenaries from 
Xylac in the west; and with him, going aboard, the king 
took certain of his concubines and jesters and other min- 
istrants, as well as an ample store of liquors and rare 
viands, so that he should lack for nothing during the voy 
age. And, mindful of the prophecy of Geol, the king 
armed himself with a longbow and a quiver filled with 
parrot-feathered arrows; and he also carried a sling of 
lion-leather and a blow-gun of black bamboo from which 
tiny poisoned darts were discharged. 

It seemed that the gods favored the voyage; for a wind 
blew strongly from the west on the morning of departure; 
and the fleet, which numbered fifteen vessels, was borne 
with bellying sails toward the sea-risen sun. And the fare 
well clamors and shoutings of Euvoran’s people on the 
wharves were soon stilled by distance; and the marble 
houses of Aramoam on its four palmy hills were drowned 
in that swiftly foundering bank of azure which was the 
shoreline of Ustaim. And thereafter, for many days, the 
ironwood beaks of the galleys clove a softly weltering sea 
of indigo that rose unbroken on all sides to a cloudless, 
dark-blue heaven. 

Trusting in the oracle of Geol, that earthen god who 
had never failed his fathers, the king made merry as was 
his wont; and reclining beneath a saffron canopy on the 
poop of the quadrireme, he swilled from an emerald 
beaker the wines and brandies that had lain in his palace 
vaults, storing the warmth of elder, ardent suns whereon 
oblivion’s black rime was fallen. And he laughed at the 
ribaldries of his fools, at unquenchable ancient bawdries 
that had won the laughter of other kings in the sea-lost 
continents of yore. And his women diverted him with 
harlotries that were older than Rome or Atlantis. And 
ever he kept at hand, beside his couch, the weapons 
wherewith he hoped to hunt and slay again the gazolba- 
bird, according to the oracle of Geol. 



  

The winds were unfailing and auspicious, and the fleet 
sped onward, with the great black oarsmen singing gaily 
at their oars, and the gorgeous sailcloths flapping loudly, 
and the long banners floating on the air like straight- 
blown flames. After a fortnight they came to Sotar, whose 
low-lying coast of cassia and sago barred the sea for a 
hundred leagues from north to south; and in Loithe, the 
chief port, they paused to inquire for the gazolba-bird. 
There were rumors that the bird had passed above Sotar; 
and some of the people said that a cunning sorcerer of 
that isle, named Iffibos, had drawn it down through his 
sorcery and had closed it in a cage of sandalwood. So the 
king landed in Loithe, deeming his quest perhaps already 
nigh to its end, and went with certain of his captains and 
soldiers to visit Iffibos, who dwelt in a retired vale among 
the mountains at the island’s core. 

It was a tedious journey, and Euvoran was much an 
noyed by the huge and vicious gnats of Sotar, which were 
no respecters of royalty, and were always insinuating 
themselves under his turban. And when, after some delay 
and divagation in the deep jungle, he came to the house 
of Iffibos on a high, precarious crag, he found that the 
bird was merely one of the bright-plumaged vultures pe 
culiar to that region, which Iffibos had tamed for his own 
amusement. So the king returned to Loithe, after declin 
ing somewhat rudely the invitation of the sorcerer, who 
wished to show him the unusual feats of falconry to 
which he had trained the vulture. And in Loithe the king 
tarried no longer than was needful for the laying aboard 
of fifty jars of the sovereign arrack in which Sotar excels 
all other orient lands. 

Then, coasting the southern cliffs and promontories, 
where the sea bellowed prodigiously in mile-deep caverns, 
the ships of Euvoran sailed beyond Sotar, and came after 
many days to the seldom-visited Isle of Tosk, whose peo 
ple were more akin to apes and lemurs than to men. And 
Euvoran asked the people for news of the gazolba, and 
received only a chattering as of apes in answer. So the 
king ordered his men-at-arms to catch a number of these 
savage islanders and crucify them on the coco palms for 



  

their incivility. And the men-at-arms pursued the nimble 
people of Tosk for a full day among the trees and boul 
ders in which the isle abounded, but without catching a 
single one of them. So the king contented himself by cru 
cifying several of the men-at-arms for their failure to 
obey him and sailed on to the seven atolls of Yumatot, 
whose inhabitants were mostly cannibals. And beyond 
Yumatot, which was the usual limit of eastern voyaging 
from Ustaim, the vessels entered the Hozian Sea, and 
began to touch at partly mythic shores and islands 
charted only in story. 

It were tedious to relate the full particulars of that voy 
age, in which Euvoran and his captains went ever toward 
the sources of the dawn. Various and without number 
were the strange marvels they found in the archipelagoes 
beyond Yumatot; but nowhere could they find a single 
feather such as had formed part of the gazolba’s plum 
age, and the quaint people of those isles had never seen 
the bird. 

Howbeit, the king beheld many a flock of unknown, 
fiery-winged fowl that went over his galleys in mid-sea, 
passing between the unmapped islets. And, landing often, 
he practiced his archery on lorikeets and lyrebirds and 
boobies, or stalked the golden cockatoos with his 
blowgun. And he chased the dodo and dinomis on shores 
that were otherwise unpeopled. And once, in a sea of 
high-beetling barren rocks, the fleet was assailed by 
mighty griffins that flew down from their crag-built eyries, 
with wings shining like feathery brass under the meridian 
sun, and making a harsh clangor as of shields shaken in 
battle. And the griffins, being both ferocious and pertina 
cious, were driven away with much difficulty by boulders 
hurled from the catapults of the vessels. 

Everywhere, as the ships drove eastward, there were 
multitudes of fowl. But at sunset of a day in the fourth 
moon following their departure from Aramoam, the ves 
sels approached a nameless isle that towered mile-high 
with cliffs of black, naked basalt, around whose base the 
sea cried with baffled anger, and about whose precipices 
there were no wings nor voices of birds. The isle was 



  

topped with gnarly cypresses that might have grown in a 
windy graveyard; and sullenly it took the afterglow, as if 
drenched with a gore of darkening blood. Far up in the 
cliffs there were strange columned caves like the dwellings 
of forgotten troglodytes, but seemingly inaccessible to 
men; and the caves to all appearances were unoccupied by 
any kind of life, though pitting the face of the isle for 
leagues. And Euvoran ordered his captains to drop anchor, 
meaning to search for a landing place on the morrow: 
since, in his anxiety to retrieve the gazolba, he would pass 
no isle of the dawnward main, not even the unlikeliest, 
without due inquiry and examination. 

Quickly fell the darkness, without moon, till the close- 
anchored ships were visible to each other only by their 
lanterns. And Euvoran sat at supper in his cabin, sipping 
the golden arrack of Sotar between mouthfuls of mango 
jelly and phenicopter’s meat. And, saving a small watch 
on each of the vessels, the sailors and men-at-arms were 
all at evening mess; and the rowers ate their figs and len 
tils in the oardecks. Then, from the watches, there was a 
wild shouting of alarm, and the shouting ceased in a mo 
ment, and each of the great vessels rocked and sagged in 
the water, as if a monstrous weight had settled upon it. 
No man knew the thing that had happened, but every 
where there was turmoil and confusion, some saying that 
the fleet was attacked by pirates. Those who peered from 
the ports and oarholes saw that the lanterns of their 
neighbors had been quenched, and perceived a milling 
and seething as of low-driven clouds in the darkness, and 
saw that foul black creatures, large as men and winged 
like vampires, were clinging to the ranged oars in myriads. 
And those who dared to approach the open hatches 
found that the decks, the rigging and the masts were 
crowded with similar creatures, who, it seemed, were of 
nocturnal habit and had come down in the manner of 
bats from their caves in the island. 

Then, like things of nightmare, the monsters began to 
invade the hatches and assail the ports, clawing with hell 
ish talons at the men who opposed them. And, being 
somewhat hampered by their wings, they were driven 
back with spears and arrows, but returned again and 
again in a thickening press without number, cheeping 
with a faint and batlike sound. It was plain that they were 
vampires, for whenever they had dragged a man down, as 
many of them as could gain mouthhold would fasten 
upon him incontinently, and suck his blood till little more 
remained than a skinful of bones. The upper oardecks, 
being half open to the sky, were quickly usurped, and 
their crews were overcome with a hideous swarming; and 
the rowers in the orlops cried that the sea water was pour 
ing in through their oarholes as the ships sank deeper be 
neath an ever-gathering weight. 

All night, at the ports and hatches, the men of Euvoran 
fought the vampires, taking turn in shifts when they wearied. 
Many of them were seized and their blood sucked 
before the eyes of their fellows as the night wore on; and 
the vampires, it seemed, were not to be slain by mortal 
weapons, though the blood they had gorged came forth in 
spouting rills from their wounded bodies. And thicklier 
they clustered upon the fleet, till the biremes began to 
founder, and the rowers were drowned in the sunken 
lower decks of certain triremes and quadriremes. 

King Euvoran was wroth at this unseemly turmoil that 
had interrupted his supper; and when the golden arrack 
was spilt and the dishes of rare meat were emptied on the 
floor by the vessel’s violent rocking, he would have issued 
from his cabin, fully armed, to try conclusions with these 
piacular miscreants. But, even as he turned to fling wide 
the cabin door, there was a soft infernal pittering at the 
portholes behind him; and the women who were with him 
began to shriek, and the fools cried out in terror. And the 
king saw in the lamplight a grisly face with the teeth and 
nostrils of a flittermouse, that leaned in through one of 
the cabin ports. He sought to repel the face; and there 
after, till dawn, he fought the vampires with those very 
weapons he had designed for the slaying of the Gazolba; 
and the ship’s captain, who was with him at supper, 
guarded a second port with his claymore; and the others 
were held by two of the king’s eunuchs, armed with scimi 
tars. In this warfare they were favored by the smallness of 
the ports, which could hardly in any case have allowed the 
free passages of their winged assailants. And, after light 
less hours of tedious, horrid struggle, the darkness became 
thinn ed with brown twilight, and the vampires lifted from 
the vessels in a black cloud and returned to their caves in 
the mile-high cliffs of that unnamed island. 

Heavy was the heart of Euvoran within him when he 
surveyed the damage done to his proud argosies of war: 
for, among the fifteen vessels, seven had sunk in the 
night, borne under and swamped by those obscenely 
clinging hordes of vampires; and the decks of the others 
were bloody as abattoirs; and half of their sailors and 
rowers and men-at-arms were lying flat and flaccid as 
empty wine-skins after the greedy drinking of the great 
bats. And the sails and banners were shredded into rags; 
and everywhere, from beak to rudder of Euvoran’s gal 
leys, there was the stain and reek of a Stymphalian foul 
ness. So, lest another eve should find them within wing-shot 
of that accursed isle, the king ordered his remaining 
captains to weigh anchor; and the other ships, with sea 
water still awash in their orlops, and some with drowned 
rowers still at the oars of their nether banks, drew slowly 
and heavily to eastward, till the pitted walls of the isle 
began to sink beneath the main. At eve there was no land 
in sight anywhere; and after two days, still unharried by 
the vampires, they came to a coral island, low in the 
wave, with a calm lagoon that was haunted only by 
ocean-fowl. And there, for the first time, Euvoran paused 
to repair his tattered sails, and pump the sea from his 
holds, and clean the blood and vileness from his decks. 

However, in spite of this disaster, the king abated not 
in any degree his purpose, to sail ever on toward the 
fountains of the day, until, as Geol had predicted, he 
should come again on the flown gazolba and slay it with 
his own royal hand. So, for another moon, they passed 
amid other and stranger archipelagoes, and penetrated 
deeplier into the regions of myth and story. 

Bravely they drove into mornings of amaranth crossed 
by gilded lories, and noontides of darkly ardent sapphire 
where the rose flamingos went before them to lost, inviolate 
strands. The stars changed above them, and under 
the alien-figured Signs they heard the wild, melancholy 
crying of swans that flew southward fleeing the winter of 
realms indiscoverable, and seeking the summer in track 
less worlds. And they held speech with fabulous men who 
wore for mantles the ell-wide pennons of the roc, trailing 
far on the earth behind them; and men who arrayed 
themselves in epyomis plumes. And they spoke also with 
antic people whose bodies were covered with a down like 
that of new-hatched fowl, and others whose flesh was 
studded as if with pinfeathers. But nowhere could they 
learn aught of the gazolba. 

At mid-forenoon, early in the sixth month of the voy 
age, a new and unheard-of shore ascended from the deep, 
curving for many miles, from northeast to southwest, with 
sheltered harbors, and cliffs and pinnacled crags that were 
interspaced with low-lying verdurous dales. As the galleys 
hove toward it, Euvoran and his captains saw that towers 
were builded on certain of the highmost crags; but in the 
haven below them there were no ships at anchor nor 
boats moving; and the shore of the haven was a wilder 
ness of green trees and grass. And, sailing still nearer, 
and entering the harbor, they descried no evident sign of 
man, other than the crag-reared towers. 

The place, however, was full of an extraordinary num 
ber and variety of birds, ranging in size from little tits and 
passerines to creatures of greater wingspread than eagle 
or condor. They circled over the ships in coveys and 
great, motley flocks, seeming to be both curious and 
wary; and Euvoran saw that a winged concourse, as it 
were, went to and fro above the woods and about the 
cliffs and towers. He bethought him that here was a likely 
haunt in which to track down the gazolba; so, arming 
himself for the chase, he went ashore in a small boat with 
several of his men. 

The birds, even the largest, were patently timid and in 
offensive; for when the king landed on the beach, the very 
trees appeared to take flight, so numerous were the fowl 
that soared and flew inland, or sought the crags and pinnacles 
that rose beyond bowshot. None remained of the 
multitude visible shortly before; and Euvoran marveled at 
such c unnin g; and moreover he was somewhat exasper 
ated, for he wished not to depart without bringing down a 
trophy of his skill, even though he should fail to find the 
gazolba itself. And he deemed the behavior of the birds 
all die more curious because of the island’s solitude: for 
here there were no paths other than would be made by 
forest animals; and die woods and meadows were wholly 
wild and incult; and the towers were seemingly desolate, 
with seafowl and landfowl flying in and out of their 
empty windows. 

The king and his men combed the deserted woods 
along the shore, and came to a steep slope of bushes and 
dwarf cedars, whose upper incline approached the tallest 
tower at one side. Here, at the slope’s bottom, Euvoran 
saw a small owl that slept in one of the cedars, as if 
wholly unaware of the commotion made by the other 
birds in their flight. And Euvoran trained an arrow and 
shot down the owl, though ordinarily he would have 
spared a prey so paltry. And he was about to pick up the 
fallen owl, when one of the men who accompanied him 
cried out as if in alarm. Then, turning his head as he 
stooped beneath the foliage of the cedar, the king beheld 
a brace of colossal birds, larger than any he had yet des 
cried on that isle, who came down from the tower like 
falling thunderbolts. Before he could fit another arrow to 
the string, they were upon him, making a loud roar with 
the drumming of their mighty vans, and beating him in 
stantly to the ground, so that he was aware of them only 
as a storm of dreadfully rushing plumes and a hurlyburly 
of cruel beaks and talons. And, before his men could 
rally to assist him, one of the birds fastened its huge 
claws in the shoulder cape of the king’s mantle, not spar 
ing the flesh beneath in its fell clutch, and carried him 
away toward the tower on the crag as easily as a gerfal 
con would have carried a small leveret. The kin g was 
wholly helpless, and he had dropped his longbow beneath 
the onset of the birds, and his blowgun had been shaken 
loose from the girdle at which it depended, and all his 
darts and arrows were spilled. And he had no weapon remaining, 
other than a sharp misericordia; and this he 
could not use to any purpose against his captor in mid 
air. 

Swiftly he neared the tower, with a flock of lesser fowl 
circling about him and shrieking as if with derision till he 
was deafened by their din. And a sickness came upon him 
because of the height to which he had been carried and 
the violence of his ascent; and giddily he saw the walls of 
the tower sink past him with wide and portal-like win 
dows. Then, as he began to retch in his sickness, he was 
borne in through one of the windows and was dropped 
rudely on the floor of a high and spacious chamber. 

He sprawled at full length on his face and lay vomiting 
for awhile, heedless of his surroundings. Then, recovering 
somewhat, he raised himself to a sitting position, and be 
held before him, above a sort of dais, an enormous perch 
of red-gold and yellow-ivory wrought in the form of a 
new crescent arching upward. The perch was supported 
between posts of black jasper fleckled as if with blood, 
and upon it there sat a most gigantic and uncommon 
bird, eyeing Euvoran with a grim and dreadful and austere mien, 
as an emperor migjht eye the gutter scum that 
his guards have hailed before him for some obscene 
offense. The plumage of the bird was Tyrian purple, and 
his beak was like a mighty pickaxe of pale bronze that 
darkened greenly toward the point, and he clutched the 
perch with iron talons that were longer than the mailed 
fingers of a warrior. His head was adorned with quills of 
turquoise-blue and amber-yellow, like a many-pointed 
crown; and about his long, unfeathered throat, rough as 
the scaled skin of a dragon, he wore a singular necklace 
composed of human heads, and the heads of various fe 
rine beasts such as the weasel, the wildcat, the stoat and 
the fox, all of which had been reduced to a common size 
and were no larger than groundnuts. 

Euvoran was terrified by the aspect of this fowl; and 
his alarm was not lessened when he saw that many other 
birds of a size inferior only to his were sitting about the 
chamber on less costly and less elevated perches, even as 
grandees of the realm might sit in the presence of their 
sovereign. And behind Euvoran, like guards, there stood 
together with its fellow the creature that had rapt him to 
the tower. 

Now, to his utter confounding, the great Tyrian-feath 
ered bird addressed him in human speech. And the bird 
said to him in a harsh but magniloquent and majestic 
voice: 

“Too hardily, O filth of mankind, thou hast intruded 
on the peace of Omava, isle that is sacred to the birds, 
and wantonly thou hast slain one of my subjects. For 
know that I am the monarch of all birds that fiy, walk, 
wade or swim on this terraqueous globe of Earth; and in 
Omava is my seat and my capital. Verily, justice shall be 
done upon thee for thy crime. But if thou hast aught to 
say in thy defense, I will give thee hearing now, for I 
would not that even the vilest of earthly vermin, and the 
most pernicious, should accuse me of inequity or tyr 
anny.” 

Then, blustering somewhat, though sorely afraid at 
heart, Euvoran gave answer to the bird, and said: 

“I came hither seeking the gazolba, which adorned my 
crown in Ustaim, and was feloniously reft from me to 
gether with the crown through the spell of a lawless nec 
romancer. And know that I am Euvoran, King of Ustaim, 
and I bow me to no bird, not even the mightiest of that 
species.” 

Thereat the ruler of the birds, as if amazed and more 
indignant than before, made question of Euvoran and in 
terrogated him sharply concerning the gazolba. And, 
learning that this bird had been slain by sailors and after 
wards stuffed, and that the whole purpose of Euvoran in 
his voyage was to catch and kill it a second time and 
restufi it if necessary, the ruler cried in a great and wrath 
ful voice: 

“This helpeth not thy case, but showeth thee guilty of a 
twofold crime and a triple infamy: for thou hast owned a 
most abominable thing, and one that subverteth nature. 
In this my tower, as is right and proper, I keep the bodies 
of men that my taxidermists have stuffed for me; but 
truly, it is not allowable nor sufferable that man should 

do thus to birds. So, for the sake of justice and retribution, 
I shall presently commit thee to the care of my taxi 
dermists. Indeed, methinks that a stuffed king (since even 
the vermin have kings) will serve to enhance my collec 
tion.” 

After that, he addressed Euvoran’s guards and enjoined 
them: “Away with this vileness. Confide it to the 
man-cage, and maintain a strict watch before it.” 

Euvoran, urged and directed by the pecking of his 
guards, was compelled to climb a sort of sloping ladder 
with broad rungs of teak, that led from the chamber to 
one above it in the tower’s top. In the center of this room 
there was a bamboo cage of capacity more than ample 
for the housing of six men. The king was driven into the 
cage, and the birds bolted the door upon him with their 
claws, which seemed to have the deftness of fingers. 
Thereafter one of them remained beside the cage, eyeing 
Euvoran vigilantly through the spaces of the bars; and the 
other flew away through a great window and did not return. 

The king sat down on a litter of straw, since the cage 
contained no better provision for his comfort. Despair 
was heavy upon him, and it seemed that his plight was 
both dreadful and ignominious. And sorely was he aston 
ished, that a bird should speak with human speech, in 
sulting and reviling humankind; and he deemed it an 
equally monstrous thing that a bird should dwell in royal 
state, with servitors to do his will, and the pomp and 
power of a king. And, pondering these unholy prodigies, 
Euvoran waited for his doom in the man-cage; and after 
awhile, water and raw grain were brought to him in 
earthen vessels; but he. could not eat the grain. And still 
later, as the day drew toward afternoon, he heard a 
shouting of men and a shrieking of birds below the tower; 
and above these noises, anon, there were clashings as of 
weapons and thuddings as of boulders loosened from the 
crag. So Euvoran knew that his sailors and soldiers, hav 
ing seen him borne into captivity in the tower, were as 
sailing the place in an effort to succor him. And the 
noises waxed, mounting to a most tremendous and atrocious 
din, and there were cries as of people mortally 
wounded, and a vengeful shrilling as of harpies in battle. 
Then, presently, the clamor ebbed away, and the shout 
ings grew faint, and Euvoran knew that his men had 
failed to take the tower. And hope waned within him , 
dying in a darker murk of despair. 

So the afternoon went over, declining seaward, and the 
sun touched Euvoran with its level beams through a west 
ern window and colored the bars of his cage with a 
mockery of gold. Presently the light flowed from the 
room, and after awhile the twilight rose, weaving a trem 
ulous phantom web on the pale air. And between the sun 
set and the darkness, a nightguard came in to relieve the 
day-flying fowl who warded the captive king. The new 
comer was a nyctalops with glowing yellow eyes, and he 
stood taller than Euvoran himself, and was formed and 
feathered somewhat in the burly fashion of an owl, and 
he had the stout legs of a megapode. Euvoran was un 
comfortably aware of the bird’s eyes, which burned upon 
him with a brighter bale as the dusk deepened. Hardly 
could he sustain that ever-vigilant scrutiny. But anon the 
moon rose, being but little past the full, and poured a 
spectral quicksilver into the room, and paled the eyes of 
the bird; and Euvoran conceived a desperate plan. 

His captors, deeming all his weapons lost, had neglected 
to remove from his girdle the misericordia, which 
was long and double-edged and needle-sharp at the tip. 
And stealthily he gripped the hilt of the misericordia 
under his mantle, and feigned a sudden illness with 
groanings and tossings and convulsions that threw him 
against the bars. And, even as he had schemed, the great 
nyctalops came nearer, curious to learn what ailed the 
king; and stooping, he leaned his owl-like head between 
the bars above Euvoran. And the king, pretending a more 
violent convulsion, drew the misericordia from its sheath 
and struck quickly at the outstretched throat of the bird. 

Shrewdly the thrust went home, piercing the deepest 
veins, and the squawking of the bird was choked by his 
own blood; and he fell, flapping noisily, so that Euvoran 
feared that all the occupants of the tower would be awakened 
by the sound. But it seemed that his fears were 
bootless; for none came to the chamber; and soon the 
flappings ceased, and the nyctalops lay still in a great 
heap of ruffled feathers. Thereupon the king proceeded 
with his plan, and shot back the bolts of the wide-latticed 
bamboo door with small difficulty. Then, going to the 
head of the teakwood ladder which ran to the room be 
neath, he looked down and beheld the ruler of the birds 
asleep in the moonlight on his chryselephantine perch, 
with his terrible pickaxe beak under his wing. And Eu- 
voran was afraid to descend into the chamber, lest the 
ruler should awake and see him. And also, it occurred to 
him that the lower stories of the tower might well be 
guarded by such fowl as the nocturnal creature he had 
slain. 

Again his despair returned upon him; but being of a 
sleightful and crafty bent, Euvoran bethought him of an 
other scheme. With much labor, using the misericordia, 
he skinned the mighty nyctalops, and cleaned the blood 
from its plumage as best he could. Then Euvoran 
wrapped himself in the skin, with the head of the nycta 
lops rearing above his own head, and eyeholds in its burly 
throat through which he could look out amid the feathers. 
And the skin fitted him well enough because of his pigeon 
breast and his potbelly; and his spindleshanks were hid 
den behind the heavy shanks of the bird as he walked. 

Then, imitating the gait and carriage of this fowl, the 
king descended the ladder, treading cautiously to avoid a 
fall and making little noise, lest the ruler of the birds 
should awaken and detect his imposture. And the ruler 
was all alone, and he slept without stirring while Euvoran 
reached the floor and crossed the chamber stealthily to 
another ladder, leading to the next room below. 

In this room there were many great birds asleep on 
perches, and the king was nigh to perishing with terror as 
he passed among them. Some of the birds moved a little 
and chirped drowsily, as if aware of his presence; but none 
challenged him. And he went down to a third room, 
and was startled to see therein the standing figures of 
many men, some in the garb of sailors, and others clad 
like merchants, and others nude and ruddled with bright 
ores like savages. And the men were still and stark as if 
enchanted; and the king feared them little less than he 
had feared the birds. But, remembering that which the 
ruler had told him, he divined that these were persons 
who had been captured even as he himself, and had been 
slain by the birds and preserved through the art of an 
avian taxidermy. And, trembling, he passed down to an 
other room, which was full of stuffed cats and tigers and 
serpents and various other enemies of birdkind. And the 
room below this was the ground story of the tower, and 
its windows and portals were guarded by several gigantic 
nightfowl similar to that whose skin was worn by the 
king. Here, indeed, was his greatest peril and the supreme 
trial of his courage; for the birds eyed him alertly with 
their fiery golden orbs; and they greeted him with 
a soft whoo-whooing as of owls. And the knees of Euvoran 
knocked together behind the birdshanks; but, imi 
tating the sound in reply, he passed among the guards 
and was not molested by them. And, reaching an open 
portal of the tower, he saw the moonlit rock of the crag 
lying at a distance of no more than two cubits below him; 
and he hopped down from the door-sill in the manner of 
a fowl, and found his way precariously from ledge to 
ledge along the crag, till he reached the upper beginning 
of that declivity at whose bottom he had slain the little 
owl. Here his descent was easier, and he came anon to 
the woods around the harbor. 

But, ere he could enter the woods, there was a shrill 
singing of arrows about him, and the king was wounded 
slightly by one of the arrows, and he roared out in his 
anger, and dropped the mantling birdskin. Thereby, no 
doubt, he was saved from death at the hands of his own 
men, who were coming through the wood with intent to 
assail the tower by night. And, learning this, the king for 
gave the jeopardy in which their arrows had placed him. 
But he thought it best to refrain from attacking the tower, 
and to quit the isle with all dispatch. So, returning to his 
flagship, he ordered all his captains to set sail immedi 
ately; for, knowing the baleful power of the bird-monarch, 
he was more than apprehensive of pursuit; and he 
deemed it well to place a wide interval of sea between his 
vessels and that isle ere dawn. So the galleys drew from 
the tranquil harbor, and rounding a northeastern promontory, 
they went due east in a course contrary to the 
moon. And Euvoran, sitting in his cabin, regaled himself 
with a variety and plenitude of viands to make up for his 
fasting in the man-cage; and he drank a whole gallon of 
palm-wine, and added thereto a jarful of the puissant 
pale-gold arrack of Sotar. 

Halfway betwixt midnight and mom, when the isle of 
Omava was left far behind, the steersmen of the vessels 
beheld a wall of ebon cloud that rose swiftly athwart the 
lowering moon. Higher it climbed upon the heavens, 
spreading and toppling in towers of thunder, till the storm 
overtook Euvoran’s fleet and drove it on as if with the 
loosed hurricanes of hell through a weltering of unstarred 
chaos. The ships were sundered in the gloom and were 
borne far apart; and at daybreak the king’s quadrireme 
was alone in a prone-rushing tumult of mingled wave and 
cloud; and the mast was shattered, together with most of 
the beefwood oars; and the vessel was a toy for the demons 
of the tempest. 

For three days and nights, with no glimmer of sun or 
star discerned through the ever-boiling murk, the vessel 
was hurled onward as if caught in a cataract of elements 
pouring to some bottomless gulf beyond the verges of the 
world. And early on the fourth day the clouds were 
somewhat riven; but a wind still blew like the breath of 
perdition. Then, lifting darkly through the spray and 
vapor, a half-seen land arose before the prow, and the 
helmsman and the rowers were wholly helpless to turn 
the doomed ship from its course. And shortly after, with 
a great crashing of its carven beak, and a terrible rending 
of timbers, the vessel struck on a low reef hidden by the 
flying foam, and its lower decks were flooded quickly. 
And the vessel began to founder, with the poop tilting 
sharply and more sharply, and the water frothing at the 
lee bulwarks. 

Gaunt and cragged and austere was the shore beyond 



  

the reef, beheld only through veils of the sea’s foaming 
fury. And scant, it seemed, was the hope of reaching 
land. But, ere the wrecked argosy had gone down beneath 
him, Euvoran lashed himself with ropes of coir to an 
empty wine barrel, and cast himself from the sloping 
deck. And those of his men who were not already 
drowned in the hold or swept overboard by the typhoon, 
leapt after him into that high-wallowing sea, some trust 
ing only to their might as swimmers and others clinging 
to casks or broken spars or planks. And most were drawn 
under in the seething maelstroms or were beaten to death 
on the rocks; and of all the ship’s company, the king 
alone survived and was cast ashore with the breath of life 
unquenched within him by that bitter sea. 

Half drowned and senseless, he lay where the surf had 
spewed him on a shelving beach. Soon the gale forgot its 
violence, and the billows came in with falling crests, and 
the clouds went over in a rack of pearl, and the sun, 
climbing above the rocks, shone down upon Euvoran 
from a deep, immaculate azure. And the king, still dazed 
from the buffeting rudeness of the sea, heard dimly 
and as if in dream the shrilling of an unknown bird 
Then, opening his eyes, he beheld betwixt himself and the 
sun, librating on spread wings, that various-colored glory 
of plumes and feathers which he knew as the gazolba. 
Crying again with a voice that was harsh and shrill as 
that of the peafowl, the bird hung above him for a mo 
ment, and then flew inland through a rift among the 
crags. 

Forgetful of all his hardships and the loss of his proud 
galleys of war, the king unbound himself in haste from 
the empty barrel; and, rising giddily, he followed the bird. 
And, though he was now weaponless, it seemed to him 
that the fulfillment of the oracle of Geol was at hand. 
And hopefully he armed himself with a great cudgel of 
driftwood and gathered heavy pebbles from the beach as 
he pursued the gazolba. 

Beyond the cleft in the high and rugged crags, he 
found a sheltered valley with quiet-flowing springs, and 
woods of exotic leaf, and fragrant orient shrubs in blossom. 
Here, from bough to bough before his astounded 
eyes, there darted great numbers of fowl that wore the 
gaudy plumage of the gazolba; and among them he was 
unable to distinguish the one he had followed, deeming it 
the avian garniture of his lost crown. The multitude of 
these birds was a thing beyond his comprehension: since 
he and all his people had thought the stuffed fowl unique 
and fellowless throughout the world, even as the other 
components of the crown of Ustaim. And it came to him 
that his fathers had been deceived by the mariners who 
had slain the bird in a remote isle, swearing later that it 
was the last of its kind. 

However, though wrath and confusion were in his 
heart, Euvoran bethought him that a single bird from out 
the flock would still stand as the emblem and the talisman 
of his royalty in Ustaim, and would vindicate his quest 
among the isles of dawn. So, with a valiant hurling of 
sticks and stones, he tried to bring down one of the gazolbas. 
And ever before him as he chased them, the birds 
flew from tree to tree with a horrid shrieking, and a flurry 
of plumes that wrought an imperial splendor on the air. 
And at length, by his own good aim or the cast of chance, 
Euvoran slew him a gazolba. 

As he went to retrieve the fallen bird, he saw a man in 
tattered raiment of an uncouth cut, armed with a rude 
bow, and carrying over his shoulder a brace of gazolbas 
tied together at the feet with tough grass. And the man 
wore in lieu of other headgear the skin and feathers of 
the same fowl. He came toward Euvoran, shouting indis 
tinctly through his matted beard; and the king beheld him 
with surprise and anger, and cried loudly: 

“Vile serf, how darest thou to kill the bird that is sacred 
to the kings of Ustaim? And knowest thou not that 
only the kings may wear the bird for headgear? I, who 
am King Euvoran, shall hold you to a dire accounting for 
these deeds.” 

At this, eyeing Euvoran strangely, the man laughed a 
long and derisive laugh, as if he deemed the king a per 
son somewhat addled in his wits. And he seemed to find 
much merriment in the aspect of the king, whose garments 
were draggled and were stiff and stained with the 
drying sea water, and whose turban had been snatched 
away by the felon waves, leaving his baldness without dis 
guise. And when he had done laughing, the man said: 

“Verily, this is the first and only jest that I have heard 
in nine years, and my laughter must be forgiven. For nine 
years agone I was shipwrecked on this isle, being a sea 
captain from the far southwestern land of Ullotroi, and 
the sole member of my ship’s company that survived and 
came safe to shore. In all those years I have held speech 
with no other man, since the isle is remote from the mari 
time routes, and has no people other than the birds. And 
as for your questions, they are readily answered: I kill 
these fowl to avert the pangs of famine, since there is lit 
tle else on the isle for sustenance, apart from roots and 
berries. And I wear on my head the skin and feathers of 
the fowl because my tarboosh was stolen by the sea 
whenas it flung me rudely upon this strand. And I wot 
not of the strange laws that you mention; and moreover, 
your kingship is a matter that concerns me little, since the 
isle is kingless, and you and I are alone thereon, and I 
am the stronger of us twain and the better armed. There 
fore, be well advised, O King Euvoran: and since you 
have slain yourself a bird, I counsel you to pick up the 
bird and come with me. Truly, it may be that I can help 
you in the matter of spitting and broiling this fowl: for I 
must deem that you are more familiar with the products 
of the culinary art than with the practice.” 

Now, hearing all this, the wrath of Euvoran sank 
within him like a flame that fails for oil. Clearly he saw 
the plight to which his voyage had brought him in the 
end; and bitterly he discerned the irony that was hidden 
in the true oracle of Geol. And he knew that the wreck 
age of his fleet of war was scattered among lost islands or 
blown into seas unvoyageable. And it came to him that 
never again should he see the marble houses of Ara- 
moam, nor live in pleasant luxury, nor administer the 
dooms of law between the torturer and the executioner in 
the hall of justice, nor wear the gazolba-crown amid the 
plaudits of his people. So, being not utterly bereft of reason, 
he bowed him to his destiny. And he said to die sea 
captain: 

“There is sense in what you say. Therefore, lead on.” 

Then, laden with the spoils of the chase, Euvoran and 
the captain, whose name was Naz Obbamar, repaired 
companionably to a cave in the rocky hill-slope of the 
isle’s interior, which Naz Obbamar had chosen for his 
abode. Here the captain made a fire of dry cedar boughs, 
and showed the king the proper manner in which to pluck 
his fowl and broil it over the fire, turning it slowly on a 
spit of green camphorwood. And Euvoran, being fam 
ished, found the meat of the gazolba far from unpalata 
ble, though somewhat lean and strongly flavored. And 
after they had eaten, Naz Obbamar brought out from the 
cave a rough jar of the island clay containing a wine he 
had made from certain berries; and he and Euvoran 
drank from the jar by turns, and told each other the tale 
of their adventures, and forgot for awhile the rudeness 
and desolation of their plight. 

Thereafter they shared the isle of gazolbas, killing and 
eating the birds as their hunger ordained. Sometimes, for 
a great delicacy, they slew and ate some other fowl that 
was more rarely met on the isle, though common enough, 
perhaps, in Ustaim or Ullotroi. And King Euvoran 
made him a headdress from the skin and plumes of the 
gazolba, even as Naz Obbamar had done. And this was 
the fashion of their days till the end. 

The first to guard the fire
against the seeping death of the cold
never imagined one day it might consume them.

In the first days the world formed as a cold crust around a hot miasma of poisonous gas as an egg's shell forms around its yolk. 
The first beings gasped for breath and huddled together on the frozen expanse. 
They learned to build shelter and to hunt. Slowly the crust warmed, guysers of gas turned sleet to gentle rain. 
From the newly formed lakes and crystal mountains, vegetation grew, and beasts came to live in the young forests. 
Civilization surrounded the wilds and many mysteries were catalogued. 
The wisest of the city dwellers came to honor the dead with obelisks in their names, made exchange currency to honor them in funeral towers and to pay dowery. 
As obelisk rose and generations upon generations passed from the earth, the city dwellers forgot who built the obelisks. 


