MORE INSTRUCTIONS

Click on the button, then scroll down.
Use the mouse to select the icon.
Click to open the map.
When starting the game, the introductory story will appear. Press A or B to speed it up and continue to the main menu. Select NEW GAME, then decide on names and classes for the four central characters to begin a new game. Select CONTINUE to start the game from the last save point. Respond Rate Use  to set the speed at which messages are displayed during battle (respond rate). Select a speed from 1 (slow) to 8 (fast). ● Character Name and Class Select the first character's class with  and confirm with A. Next, decide on a name of up to four letters or symbols (including numbers). Select each letter or symbol with , and press A to enter it. Press B to delete. When you have entered all four letters or symbols in a name, press A to move on to the next character. Once you have decided the names and classes of all four characters, press A to begin the game or B to make changes. Space ♦ For names shorter than four letters/symbols, use the blank space below 'T' to fill the rest of the spaces. ● Classes There are six classes. Each has its own abilities and can use class-specific items, such as different types of weapon and armour.  Fighter -   Fighters are professional soldiers hardened after years of training. Extensive weapons training lets them equip almost anything. Thief -    The agile thief is an expert at both quick attacks and tactical retreats, but lacks resilience. Black Belt -   The master of martial arts is both mentally and physically tough, fighting effectively with both bare hands and martial arts weapons. White Mage - These mages can heal wounds and cast protective spells. Their offensive spells are focused on obliterating the undead. Black Mage -   Black Mages have the ability to unleash powerful elemental spells which can attack, debilitate and disable entire legions. Red Mage    A jack of all trades, the Red Mage has limited training in white and black magic, along with some weapons training. Basic Play   Control the four characters and journey around the world, restoring light to your four mystical soul tokens. In general, you'll rely on three screens: the map screen, the menu screen and the battle screen. ● Map Screen This is the main game screen. It shows various types of terrain, including populated areas. Move your party around the map to visit towns and castles, trek through forests and swamps, and traverse many other areas. Talk to everyone you see and fight lots of monsters to get more experience! ● Menu Screen Press START on the map screen to go to the menu screen, where you can change your equipment, check out your characters' stats and use your items or magic. ● Battle Screen When you run into enemies while adventuring, the action plays out here. World Map Town Map Screen   Move your party around the map screen with . Talk and Search Talk to people and interact with objects by standing next to them and pressing A. Investigate everyone and everything – every piece of information is important. Change Party Formation Press SELECT to check and change your party's formation. To change the formation, select a character you want to move with A. Then select another character and press A again to make the two characters swap places. The character at the top of the formation will be the one displayed on the map screen. Slain, poisoned or petrified characters are automatically moved to the bottom of the formation at the end of a battle. Using Town Facilities Various goods and servicesare available in towns and villages. Spend your gold wisely!    Weapon Shop Buy and sell weapons such as swords or staves.    Armour Shop Buy and sell protective equipment such as armour or shields.    Item Shop Buy potions and other items.    White Magic Shop Learn white magic spells.    Black Magic Shop Learn black magic spells.    Inn Staying at an inn will restore the health your party members have lost and the magic they have used. You can save your game when you stay here.    Clinic Characters who have been slain in battle can be revived with 1HP (hit point) for a fee.    Vehicles As your adventure progresses, you will come across vehicles you can use for transportation. Ship             Travel by sea and dock at ports. Canoe    Travel on rivers and lakes. You can also switch from the ship to the canoe at river mouths. Fly over seas and mountains. You can only land on open plains. Monsters will not attack you while you are flying in the airship. Code Wheel Accompanying your game disks is a code wheel, used to allow your adventurers into the Obelisk. The code wheel consists of three parts: 1. A large stationary wheel, the outer rim of which has pictures of objects printed around it. 2. An inner wheel, attached at the center to the stationary wheel. More object pictures are printed on the rim of the inner wheel. 3. Five holes, numbered 1 to 5, are on the inner wheel. As you rotate the inner wheel, letters printed on the larger wheel will appear through the holes.  The Nursery Here in the nursery you will create your own characters to adventure within the passages of the Obelisk. You will be presented with a blank birth certificate. Under the Heritage menu, you will find options which allow you to choose the child's mother and father, gender, race and aligmnent. The underlined fields of the birth certificate will fill in as you select each item, eventually completing the birth of human .'Amazon mother father, raised in. the course of a tutorial. ~ with an inheritance of _gp. Each combination affects basic attributes of the future character, such as strength or intelligence, in a different manner. Hints: • Alignment MUST be Good or Evil (not Neutral) for a Oeric, Shaman or Knight. • Only Elven and Hobbit races have the Far Sight ability. • Dwarf and Gnome races have excellent night vision. Hobbits have better than average night vision. • Neuter characters (sexless) are better users of magic (fewer distractions). When you are finished, a button entitled "Birth" will appear and begin to flash. Click on it, and your character is born. The graph in the top left corner shows the levels (between 1 and 18) of the six character attributes the new child has. These attributes are listed in the table below: Attribute Strength Health Intelligence Knowledge Mein Coordination Areas Affected Higher damage in combat and has load carrying ability Endurance, hit points IQ, ability to learn and reason Willpower, judgment Appearance, Bargaining Agility, speed, balance IX Notes Can carry 10 lbs. of weight per point of strength Being raised from death in Temple reduces this score by 1. Once health drops below 4, the character caimot be raised again. Affects Wizard/Shaman spell power. Affects Cleric/Magi spell powers. A character with a high Mien score will fare better when dealing with the shopkeeper and other characters. Critical to Thief/Ninja After naming the character, depress the "AGE" button to continue. You will now be allowed to select what will occupy your childhood. You will be presented with 4 activities, and a clock, as shown below. By selecting an activity, and using the scroll bar, you can choose the number of hours per day your character will spend on each activity. Different activities will affect the character's abilitjes. Labour | Study Pray | Play Labour: Strength and Health Study: Intelligence Prayer: Wisd~m Play: Coordination and Health The effect of the activities you perform will be reflected in the graph of your abilities. You may now choose your character's class. There are nine classe~, Serf, Fighter, Thief, Wizard, Cleric, Magus, Knight, Shaman and Ninja. These are listed under the class menu. Each class requires that the character have certain minimum ability scores. If you obtain these minimums, the class will become available on the class menu. The various classes are described below, along with their minimum scores. Fighter  Thief  Wizard  Cleric  Knight  Ninja  Shaman  Magus  Fighter: Fighters are useful in battle. The use of weapons and armour are the fighter's strong points, but scrolls are the only magic they can use. Fighters may graduate into Knights after a time. Thief: Thieves are expert at picking locks and defusing traps, and can be useful in battle due to their ability to back stab. They may wear only leather armour, and are not permitted boots, gloves or shields. In time, they may graduate into Ninjas. Wizard: The use of magic is the wizard's main strength. They can create magic scrolls, and can put themselves into a trance. They are poor fighters, however, and can wear no armour. Wizards graduate into Magi. Trance is an option available to Wizards, Ninjas and Magus. Trance is used to slow the effects of the poison long enough to reach the temple to be cured. When the Wizard is put into a trance it also renders the character lifeless until the trance is removed. Cleric: Clerics can also use magic, but cannot create scrolls. They also have the ability to divine the presence of evil or good, monsters or objects. Clerics can have armour, but cannot wear helms, gloves or shields. They may graduate to become Shaman. The higher classes (Knight, Ninja, Shmnan and Magus) are simply improved versions of the regular classes. When a Wizard becomes a Magus, a Cleric a Shmnan, or a Thief a Ninja, they gain the abilities of the Fighter class (the ability to wear armour, increased fighting ability, etc.). When a Fighter graduates into a Knight, he gains the abilities of the Cleric class, specifically the ability to cast spells. Once you have chosen a class for your character, you choose the number of years to apprentice. The time you spend will affect the primary characteristics of your character. The amount of gold you inherit upon your birth is displayed at the top left corner of the screen. The cost to apprentice is given at the bottom left. To apprentice, you may spend more than you have, as the bank will advance you the money, but you will then have nothing left to purchase supplies. You will then be prompted for a password for the character. If you wish, you may enter one, but the password cannot be changed or removed later, and it must be entered to use the character in a party. Finally, you may choose an icon which will represent your character throughout the game. There are 18 standard icons to choose from, or, by clicking on the "Roster Icons" button, you may see ones that are currently in use for other characters. Once you have chosen an icon, you may alter it to customize your character. XI The Village Within our village, several establishments arc available for you and your parly. In the tavern, brave and hardy adventurers gather to spin tales of heroism, and, possibly to embark upon a quest into the Obelisk. Hearty fare and a place to sleep are available at our excellent Hostel. All manner of weapons, clothing and sundry articles are available, for a reasonable price, at the village Shop. The fine friars of the local Temple are always at your service, and there is a Bank for your convenience. The Tavern To put together a party, select the characters you want to join, by dragging them to the grey box in the top left corner of the screen. You may select multiple characters to join your party by dragging a rectangle around all the icons you wish to join. To get a brief description of any character in the tavern, double click on their icon. Some characters may currently be in the Obelisk adventuring, healing in the temple, or training. These characters will not appear in the tavern. To find out who is not currently available for adventuring, click on the central figure at the bar (pictured above). He will inform you as to the whereabouts of these characters. Also in the tavern, is an "Idle" button, whicl1 will quickly cause one day of game time to pass. This is useful if there are characters in your party currently healing or training. No restoring of hit points or abilities occurs while waiting in the tavern, use the Hostel for this instead. The Hostel (resting and training) The hostel is for resting and rejuvenating your characters, or for arranging training to higher levels. To rest at the hostel, select the "Rest" button on the lower left of the screen until your characters have regained their lost abilities and hit points. The hostel will bill each character's bank account each day. The purpose of training is to increase a cl1aracter's class level and abilities. This results in a more capable character, and one more able to exploit their class talents (fighting, magic use, healing, etc.). To train one of your characters, selectthe character, and choose "Petition Guild" from the Town menu. If the character is ready to move up a level, the cost and time requirements will be displayed, and you may begin your training. If you choose to train, the character is unavailable until the period indicated has passed (see Tavern) and their bank account is adjusted downward. As you move up in levels, the guild, when petitioned, may offer you the opportunity to change the class of your character (from Fighter to Knight, or Wizard to Shaman, etc.) If you do so, you will gain the advantages of the new class (gaining extra abilities), but will be forced to begin at level 1 of the new class. · XIII The Shop At the shop you may purchase weapons, armour, clothing and various other articles the party may need in the Obelisk. Once in the shop, select a character. There are three options available to them, Browse, Sell and Identify. Browse allows the character to pqrchase items from the shopkeeper. The items for sale are divided into several types, at the right of the screen. When you click on an item type, a window containing all items of that type will pop up. To see information about an item, click on it. You will then be asked if you want to purchase the item. If you do, the shopkeeper will deduct the cost of the item from your bank account, and have it delivered to the camp. Sell will display any items the character is currently carrying. Select an item, and the shopkeeper will offer you a price for it. If you accept his offer, your bank balance will be updated, and the object will leave your possession. You may barter with him for a better price by refusing his offer. Identify: is used to get information about unknown objects in the characters possession. The shopkeeper will give a complete description of the object, for a price. The Temple The friars of the temple can perform three services for a character, for a fee, Cure will restore a character's hit points or cure them of any ailment which may be affecting them (poison, blindness, etc.). The cost and time required is dependent on the type of ailment. Simply restoring hit points will take place immediately, but other cures will require a stay in the temple during which the character will be unavai1;1ble. Raise will bring a character back from the dead. Each time a character is raised, they lose 1 point of Health. If they have a health score of 3 or less, they cannot be raised. The character is removed from the party and kept in the temple until the process is . complete, the cost and time of which depends on the character's level and age. Uncurse removes a curse from an object, for a fixed price. The priests wil] not indicate which objects are cursed, if any. You must know this, for they will ch;1rge you whether the object is actually cursed or not. Cursed items will cling to a character when being worn or wielded and cannot be removed until uncursed here. XIV The Bank Because your character can only carry so much weight, you must store your excess gold at the bank. In addition, it is a safe place to pool gold so that a party can pay for training or purchases which they could not individually afford. There are three activities available in the bank: ~osit, Withdraw and Transfer. Just outside of the village, the camp serves as a repository for the party's items outside the Obelisk. As you are adventuring, you may pick up more than you can carry. If you place these items in the "cache" at the campsite, they will be safe. The shopkeeper also delivers any items purchased in the shop to the camp cache. Each character has a private cache, viewable by clicking on a character and then on the character's name in the cache window. There is also a shared cache, available to all members of the party. To place an item into the cache, simply drag its icon into the cache window. To remove an item from the cache, drag its icon out, and place the item into a character icon (as described in the "Objects in Obelisk" chapter). xv Into the Obelisk Once you have accumulated a party of foolhardy adventurers, it is time to enter the Obelisk, and attempt to rescue Lady Synd. From the forest, double dicking on the stone archway will allow you to descend into the Obelisk. Using the Code Wheel The wheel is a relic needed _to gain entry to the buried keep. Immediately upon entering, you will be confronted by a wall, which contains upon it pictures of two objects. Match the picture on the outer rim of the code wheel with the lower picture on the wall. Rotate the inner part of the wheel to align this with the upper picture. Now locate the indicated box number and read the letter in view. Type the letter that appears there, and you will be permitted to enter. Once through this, several windows will be presented to you: The party window displays the characters who are currently adventuril.1.g. The positioning of the characters within the window reflects their actual positioning in the Obelisk, as though viewed from above. In this way, characters may be protected by being surrounded by other party members, or carried when unconscious by placing other player icons directly beside them. Below each of the character icons, is a status bar containing the current/maximum health score for the character. Clicking and holding the mouse button down on this status bar will cause a menu to pop up. This menu is identical to the one available under the character's name in the menu bar. This can be an effective short-cut. Also in the status bar, is a miniature icon of the weapon the character is currently wielding. One character in the party is the" current character'', and is indicated in the character window highlighted (the top right character in the window above). The threedimensional view of the Obelisk (see below) is shown as though through the eyes of the current character. Dwarf and Gnome characters have excellent night vision, so using them as the current character in dark areas of the Obelisk will improve the visibility through the view window.  The Personae window shows statistjcs on all the characters in the party. You may show the Personae window by choosing it from the "Windows" menu item under the Options menu. Clicking on the ~ button will switch the display at the nLEVEL/GOLD/FREE,CLASS/RACE/ALIGNMENT, and WIELDS, to give a full description of the character. Clicking on the ( A~A] button changes the size of the text in this window. Clicking on a name selects that character, both here and in the party window. Double clicking will present the character's item window, exactly like double clicking on the character's icon in the party window. The movement window is used to control the party's travels through the Obelisk. The upward-pointing arrow will move the characters forward, while the ''bent'' arrows beside it will turn the characters to face either left or right, while leaving them in the same place. The two side-po in ting arrows wj]J move the characters to the left orright, without altering the direction in which they are facing. The key button will make the current character attempt to open the door which is directly in front of the party. The frog button will cause all the characters in the party to leap forward. This button is useful for jumping over pits or other hazards ahead of the party. The final button is used to switch parties, as described below. XVIII Uiew The view window gives you a three-dimensional view of what the current character sees within the Obelisk. Walls and doorways will appear, as well as any objects or creatures in your way. As you move through the catacombs using the movement window (described below), the view will change accordingly. Splitting the Party . This feature of Obelisk can be useful, but care must be taken, as it is easily abused. The party should be split up only when absolutely necessary, such as when sending someoneforhelp. Tosplitacharacterfromtheparty,selectthecharacter,andehoose "Leave Behind" from the menu whose title is the character's name. The abandoned character's icon will appear in the view window. The rest of the party may now leave, and later, to switch play between the party and the abandoned character, click on the swap parties button in the movement window. NOTE: The game can only keep track of lwo separate parties. If you divide the original party into more than two groups, you must physically search through the Obelisk to find the third party. To reunite the parties, move one party through the Obelisk until they are in the same position as the characters who were left behind. As the active party approaches the inactive one, the character icons for the inactive party will appear in the view window. To rejoin the inactive characters to the active party, simply "pick up" their icons from the view window. Their icons will appear in the party window as you pick them up. XIX The time window is available to indicate how much time the party has spent adventuring within the Obelisk. All actions which the characters perform take some time, and the amount will be registered in the time window. xx Objects in Obelisk All the objects a character currently possesses are shown in the "Item Window" associated with the character. To see the item window while in the Obelisk, double click on the character's icon. Gray Mouse's items Open Examine Transfer The icons for all the items carried by the character are shown. The miniature icons beneath the items show the positioning of the items on the character's person. The shield ( ~ ) signifies that the item is being worn by the character (the armour, quiver, and dagger above). The hand ( ~ ) indicates that the item is being carried in the character's free (non-fighting) hand. The sword <.Qm.)e ans that the character is wielding the item as a weapon. A miniature bag icon ( () ) above an item means that the item has pockets, which may themselves carry items. One item at a time can be selected by clicking upon it (the armour in the above picture). The row of buttons across the bottom of the window show options available for the selected item. The scroll icon at the far right, when double clicked, will bring up a list of the scrolls carried by all members of the party. This is useful for transferring scrolls between characters. Using Objects Within the Obelisk, objects may perform a wide variety of functions. In the items window shown above, the "Open" button will cause the selected object to be opened, revealing what is in its pockets. Often, selecting an object will change the name of this button (selecting the bow will change the button to "Shoot", for example). Depressing the button may cause special things to happen. Double clicking is a short cut for selecting an item, and clicking on this button. The uses of objects within Obelisk is almost limitless, and discovering what certain objects do is part of the adventure. XXI Transferring Objects It is often desirable to have one character give an object to another. There are two methods of doing this. The first is to open the items window for the giving character (by double clicking on their icon), and select the desired object. The "Transfer" button in the items window will become available. Clicking on it produces a window which displays all the party characters, and their items. You may then select to whom the item is to be transferred. The second method also involves opening the items window for the giving character. Click and drag the object you wish to transfer. The object icon will "raise up" off the screen, and follow the mouse. Move the object over the icon cif the character to whom it will be transferred. If that character is able to receive the object (i.e. if they have room and can carry another item), their icon will highlight. Release the object icon, and the transfer is complete. When the game transfers an object, it attempts to place the object into the receiving character's free (non-fighting) hand. If that hand already has something in it, it will place it in the wielding (fighting) hand, or finally, make the receiving character wear the item. If the game cannot place the item into the free hand, it will signify this by. placing a miniature icon similar to those in the items window near the object being transferred, while it is suspended over the receiving character. For example, if Obelisk is going to cause the receiving character to wear the object being transferred, it will display a miniature shield ( ijJ) icon near the floating object. Not all objects can be worn, however, and if a character cannot receive an object, because they have no room, or ca1mot hold any more, their icon will not highlight when you drag the item over it. Getting and Dropping Objects Most of the objects you find in Obelisk will appear in the view window when you approach it. The item may be lying on the floor, attached to the wall, or placed anywhere within the view window. To pick up an object, move the mouse over its icon in the view window, and the cursor will become a hand. Clicking the mouse at this point will cause the current character to pick up the object, and place it in the first available space (free hand, fighting hand, or worn as described above in Transferring Objects). Optionally, clicking and dragging the mouse will cause the object's icon to follow the mouse, whereupon you can drop it into any party member's icon. As when transferring objects between characters, the receiving party member's icon will highlight as the object is dragged over it, if they can carry the new object. Combining Objects Placing objects within other objects is achieved using the same principle. Click on an object, and drag it over the icon of another object (both objects must be visible in the items window). If the receiving object has pockets, its icon will becoine highlighted. Releasing the mouse button will place the first object into a pocket of the second. In the same manner, gold sacks will combine into bigger sacks, containing up to 100 gold pieces. Doors Many places deep within the Obelisk are blocked by doors, some of which may be difficult to open, or locked. Locked doors appear in the view while other doors have only a door knob or handle. To attempt to open a door, use the key button in the movement window (as described above). Alternatively, you may move the mouse into the view window. When positioned over the door knob or keyhole,the cursor will become either a hand or a key. Clicking it in this state will attempt to open the door. If the cursor is a key at the time, the current character has possession of the key which will unlock the door, and the door will always open. If it is a hand, then there is no guarantee that the current character can open the door. Thieves have a better chance of opening doors, due to their lock-picking abilities. Torches The main sources of light within the Obelisk are torches. In the early stages of the game, the party will find lit torches in holders on the walls, doubtless left there by other unfortunate adventurers. Not all torches are removable from torch holders (as you will find out on the entry level). To light a torch from another torch in your hand, simply click on the unlit torch in one hand and drag it on top of the lit torch in the other hand. To remove torches from their holders, click and drag them from the view window. Torches may also be placed into holders in the view window. There is a limit to the amount of time a torch will burn, during which it will become shorter, and begin to flicker. They are too large to be lit using flint, so they must be ignited using other torches. It is recommended that you light your torches only when needed, as you may quickly run out of them. To extinguish a burning torch, shake it vigorously. XXIII Doing Battle The Citad,il is not a deserted hulk: there are many creatures who inhabit its underground pathways. Sooner or later, as your party travels through the Obelisk, you will stumble across some of them. Most groups of creatures will move toward your J1artyo nce they know of your presence. Some are faster than others. Long Range Combat If you cannot avoid a group, it is possible to attack them from a distance, Many (but not all) attack spells are effective at long range. Cast the spell normally (as described in the following chapter). A hand will rise, and either lob the magic or wait for you to aim the hand and project the magic (simply point with the mouse in the view window). Provided a character has a bow, arrows may also be fired into a group of advancing creatures. To do so, open the item window for the character who has the bow, and double click on the bow icon. The cursor will begin to track your mouse movements, at which point you may aim the shot at the creatures in the view window. Depending on the character's coordination and skill, the shot may be difficult to aim accurately. Close Combat Soon the creatures are upon you. When the "Prepare to Defend Yourself!" message appears, · you know a fight is about to commence. A single large window will be displayed, with your party arrayed on it as they were in the party window. The attacking creatures appear as other icons arranged about you, and begin to close in. Some creatures prefer to attack from different positions, some may even drop into the middle of the party from above! They vary in their intelligence and fighting technique, and they may concentrate on certain characters. Moving into Battle To move characters around, click and drag them to a new position. Characters cannot move through other icons, but must be :tnanuvered around the obstruction. In addition, the speed at which an icon moves is determined by a character's coordination, level and status. The icons will drag for only a few seconds at a time, and slow characters may take several turns to move into position. To engage a monster, simply move a character icon next to a monster icon. A thin "line of fire" will be drawn between the combatants. The actual range at which the XXV icons engage can be shown momentarily by selecting "Show Ranges" from the Options menu. This command will display circles around all icons, representing the striking range of all characters and monsters, and wait for a mouse click to continue. To select a particular character, simply dick on their icon. The pop-up menu for each character is still available by clicking and holding on that character's status bar under the icon. This menu lists the possible actions available to the character. These actions are; cast a spell or scroll, change the wielded weapon, confront, attack, parry and back stab. Spells and Scrolls This menu option is only available if the character is clear (has no monsters in their attack circle). This is due to the fact that spell casting requires concentration, and may involve physical movement to focus the spell. Reading a scroll also demands a moment of uninterrupted action. The hierarchical section of the menu will contain all the scrolls a character has (and all the spells a Wizard or Cleric has memorized). Simply choosing one will cast the spell or scroll. Change Wielded Weapon This option is also only available ifthe character is clear. You will be able to select which item in the character's possession will be transferred to the wielding hand. Attack If you do not select another course of action for a character during the fight, they will default to this action. Attack causes the character to fight the nearest engaged monster as well as possible, accounting for their strength, coordination and wielded item. Parry This option causes the cl1aracter to defend exclusively, greatly reducing the amount of damage they take from physical attack, but voiding any hitting of their own. Back Stab This is available only to a Thief or a Ninja, and can be a highly effective form of secretive attack However, if the attempt to back stab is discovered, the character is in no position to defend well and can be struck easily by the monster. Confront This is a dangerous option! It causes the character to attract attention to itself, thus drawing attack away from others. This is only wise for good fighters to try. A confronter is struck by monsters at an advantage, but also strikes them at an advantage. XXVI Physical fighting skill is determined by class, strength, coordination and level. Coordination, class and level determine whether a hit is successful, and strength and level combined with the wielded weapon's hitting ability determine the amount of damage inflicted. All items will inflict damage, though they may prove to be poor weapons. A character without any wielded weapon will still fight if engaged, but at a severe disadvantage. The exception is a Ninja, who strikes easily with bare wielding hand! Picking Up Items While in battle, characters may pick up an item near themselves by moving the mouse over the item. If the cursor becomes a hand, clicking the mouse button will pick up the object. A character has a limited reach, and must be close to an object to be able to retrieve it. Throwing Items If a character icon's status bar is visible below the icon, clicking in the miniature wielded weapon icon and dragging will draw out a dashed line with the miniature icon on the leading end as the mouse pointer. Depending on tl1e throwing character's level and skill, the line may be difficult to aim. Releasing the mouse will throw the wielded item along that line. The item will travel the length of the line and stop unless it strikes-an intervening icon. Any icon struck will suffer damage and stop the item, including other party members. The item will then remain lying on the screen where it dropped until a character picks it up. Throwing is always dangerous, because it temporarily leaves the character without a wielded weapon. Shooting Arrows If a character is wielding a bow (indicated by the miniature bow icon in the status bar beneath the character's icon), clicking on the miniature icon and dragging will produce a dotted line which ends in an arrow. When the mouse button is released, XXVII the character will attempt to fire an arrow. This will only be successful if the character is actually in possession of any arrows, and again, the line may be difficult to aim, depending on the character's level and skill. Armour Class A character's AC (Armour Class) is a value determined from their natural coordination (quickness), and any armour and magical clothing they are wearing. The lower the armour class the better! This value is used to detei:mine whether or not a monster succeeds in hitting the character when it attacks. Ending the Battle If a party member is knocked unconscious, their icon will become immovable. If all party members are killed or rendered unconscious during a fight, they will be placed in the current position in the Obelisk, and you wHl be returned to town, to recover the party somehow or form a new one. Should all the monsters be destroyed, . however, congratulations! A Spoils and Bounty screen will appear, detailing the damage sustained by each party member, the experience points gained, and any items found on themonsters. These will be left lying on the ground in the view window when the game returns to the castle screen. XXVIII Using Magic Magic plays a very important role in Obelisk. Every character bas the opportunity to cast magic, using scrolls. Scrolls can be found throughout the Obelisk. The ability to memorize magic spells is what sets Wizards and Clerics apart from the other character classes. Wizards may copy the contents of scrolls into a spell book, once they have located one, from where they may read and memorize it many times over. Clerics receive their spell casting ability through meditation and prayer. Casting Spells The method for casting a spell is simple. After selecting a character to cast the spell, either pull down the menu which has the character's·name as its title, or click and hold the mouse button down over the status bar below the character's icon until the pop-up menu appears. On either menu, the item "Spells and Scrolls" will appear. Dragging down to this will reveal a hierarchical menu, which contains all the scrolls the character has, and also all the spells they have memorized. Selecting one of these will read the scroll, or cast the spell. There are two types of attack spells: Area and Range. Area spells apply over an area determined by the spell caster's level. Range spells are focused in a "beam", the range and strength of this is determined by the spell caster's level. Range spells are Hints: • All fight attack spells compare the spell caster's level to the individual monster's level and magic resistance. Each monster may therefore be affected differently by the same spell. • Some spells may affect only one person. If a spell of this type is cast during a fight, the person to be affected must be within the spell caster's range circle. • Some spells will only perform an action when in a certain venue (camp castle or fight). These spells will usually have a small mark preceding the name in the Spells and Scrolls menu list. • To add a scroll to your Spells and Scrolls list, you must drag the scroll to the Scroll Icon at the right of the Character's Item Wind ow. The Scroll can now be transferred to other characters by double clicking on the scroll icon or copied into the Spells Book. Once a scroll has been copied into the Spell Book, it is possible that it may not be highlighted for use. Your character may not be of a high enough level to be able to memo rize the spell or that the character has memorized a number of other spells that are taking up room. First level wizards can only memorize and retain one spell at a time. Memorizing Spells (Wizards, Shamen) A Wizard (or Shaman) may inherit some scrolls at birth, and may buy some, at an exorbitant price, from the shop. The only source of new scrolls, however, is in the Obelisk. Once in possession of a scroll, the Wizard may cast it at any time, just like  any other character class. More use can be gained from the magic, however, by copying the contents of the scroll into a spell book ( which destroys the scroll). Once there, the Wizard may memorize and cast it over and over again. Spell books must be found or won within the Obelisk, there is no other way of getting one. Opening a spell book displays a complex screen which allows the Wizard to memorize spells from the book, or copy new scrolls into the book. Also, spells from within the book may be copied back onto scrolls, so any class of character can use them. Note that this does not destroy the spell in the book. Select a spell, and the usable buttons will be enabled. "Memorize" will commit the spell to memory. It appears in the Spells and Scrolls menu for future use. The amount of time thfs process takes is dependent on the level of the spell being memorized. Since the Wizard requires complete concentration during the memorization, higher level spells should not be memorized in the Obelisk, because of the possibility of being discovered by monsters. If the Wizard is interrupted before the memorization is complete, the magic is lost. To copy a scroll to the book, select a scroll in the pop-up Spells and Scrolls menu. , To create a scroll from a spell, selectthe spell and press the "Create" button. In order [ Meditate-------- Spells I (Done) XXX for the creation of the scroll to work, the Wizard must be holding a sheet of vellum while wielding a special ink and quill (all available from the shop in town at a premium price). Danger! Any time a Wizard or Shaman deals with a spell of a higher level than themselves, they risk destroying the spell, erasing it from the book, and probably injuring themselves in the bargain. Memorizing Spells (Clerics, Magi) Cleric classes gain their magic through meditation, and then commit the magic to a specific spell. Any Cletic or Shaman has, in their pop-up menu (selected by clicking and holding on the status bar beneath the character icon), an item labeled "Meditate ... ". This brings forth a window like the one on the previous page. One of four kinds (or elementals) of magic may be prayed for at one time: earth, wind, fire or water. These are represented by the four symbols across the top of the window. Select a button within the "Meditate" box corresponding to the desired symbol, and the meditation process will begin. After a delay of some time, the symbol for that elemental will be added to the stack of elementals along the top of the window. Depending on the elemental being prayed for, this may take anywhere from 1 to 4 hours. To create actual spells, select one or more elementals from one or more of the four types. The elementals will move from the stacks to form a "word" within the text box. Once the desired "word" of elementals is formed, click upon the "Memorize" button to commit the spell to memory, and make it appear on the Spells and Scrolls menu item. If the combination of elementals that form the "word'' is incorrect, then no magic can be formed from them, and they will simply vanish. Some of the earlier level combinations which can be used to create Clerical magic are listed in Appendix A, which describes all the spells available in Obelisk. Clerical magic has an advantage over Wizard magic in that elementals can be stockpiled for use while in camp, or a safe part of the Obelisk, and then quickly converted into particular spells desired at a later time. ~ XXXI Utilities a Mapping Within the Obelisk, there is one, and only one, J,Uap book. Finding and opening this will allow you to map your progress through the catacombs. Pages in the map book represent levels of the castle, and you may flip through pages using the folded flap at the bottom right corner of the page. It is up to whomever is mapping to mah1tain an accurate page number for the castle level the party is on. Using the map book involves pointing the mouse (which will appear as a pencil cursor), and clicking to make a mark on the grid. The type of mark depends on the setting of the Mapper menu: wall, torch wall, door, locked door, pit, stairs up, stairs down, hall, special and note. To change the pencil to a particular type of mark, simply pull down the Mapper menu, and select the desired option. For convenience, the Mapper menu is a "tear off" menu, which will act as a miniature window if pulled off of the menu bar (it is shown overlaying the Map Book window, above). The first seven types are simple: clicking in the grid with that option selected in the menu, will place a mark  of that type on the grid. When the menu is set to "hall", clicking the mouse will erase the grid block under the mouse. Special may be used to indicate any special features on a level to whomever is reading the map. The final type of mark, "Note," deserves special mention. When a note mark is placed on the grid, a text box appears, and you may type up to 64 characters worth of information into it. Two buttons allow the note to be saved 'Permanent' to file, 'Temporary' until the page is changed or the game ended. You may also use the 'Delete' button to remove a note. When the Mapper menu is in the note mode, any locations which have notes attached to them will appear with a small "N" at the location. Customizing Obelisk Under the "File" menu, there is a "Preferences ... " item. This item displays a screen which allows you to change several of Obelisk's parameters. I con Popup Menus D Drag Icons UHth Titles 181c1o ns in Menus €itade!© Preferences [ DK ( Cancel ) ,Clicking in one of the checkboxes enables or disables a particular preference: Sound: When enabled, all sounds in the game will be heard at the current speaker volume (set in the Control Panel under the Apple menu). Party Icon Pop-Up Menus: This preference determines whether or not you can produce a pop-up menu by clicking and holding on the status bar beneath the character icons, as described above. This pop-up menu is identical to the menu which appears in the menu bar and has the name of the current character as its title. If the Party Icon Pop-Up Menus item is disabled, the only method of seeing this menu is to use the one in the menu bar. Icons in Menus: With this preference turned on, the Items menu will display the iconic representation for all the objects listed therein. XXXIV Drag Icons with Title: Enables an item's or character's name being drawn beneath a dragging icon. This may also be toggled while dragging icons, by pressing the Option key. Utilities Finally, Obelisk provides some utilities which may come in handy during the game. The "Utilities" item is available under the "File" menu. Selecting this item will bring forth a window which contains four buttons: Transfer Character: This item will take a character in the current game, and copy that character to another saved game file (see "Starting from a Saved Game", in the "Starting Obelisk" section). This is done to facilitate moving characters between games. Important items cam1ot be transported. Print Character: This option will print an expanded version of the character information window, showing icons of carried items and contents of pockets in small icons. Print Map Page: This button will print the page to which the mapper is currently turned, complete with the map legend. This is only available when the map book has been opened. Reset Windows: This button will move all Obelisk windows to a default position on the screen. This is most useful when the program has been run on a Mac II with a large screen, possibly resulting in some windows beingJocated out of reach on a normal screen. [ Transfer Characters ... ] [ Print· Character ... ] [ Print Map Page ] [ Reset Windows ] .. Appendix A .. Spells The pages that follow contain a list of the spells available to Wizards, Magi, Clerics and Shaman in Obelisk. The first 3 levels also contain the elemental magic symbols required by Clerics and Shaman to construct the spell (certain of these spells are not available at all to Clerics. These are listed as n/a). Name Where Haelen All Fortis All Bless Maze Name Where Percer Fight \}IQ HaelanAl All ff(I) Levitas All (n/a) Accelerare Fight (n/a) Divine All Level 1 Notes Heal light wounds. Affects one person. Defense spell, lowers recipient's armour class. Affects one person. Special spell, casts a shield of protection over objects at the location the spell is cast. Protects from wandering monsters for 1 hour times the spell caster's level. Returning to the objects nullifies the spell. Level 2 Notes Attack spell, reduces armour class of monsters · making them easier to hit. Area spell. Heal light wounds. Applies to entire party. Special spell, lifts entire party off ground. Allows a party to float over pits, and carry any number of dead people. In a fight, party icons can be moved farther once this magic has been cast. Always successful form of regular divination. XXXVII Level 3 Level 5 Name Where Notes Name Where Notes Gestun Fight Attack spell, blast of wind. Light damage to all monsters. Enfeeble Fight Weakness spell, see Veikr. Area Spell. Cicatrize All Heal medium wounds. Entire party affected. Cural All Healing spell, strong curing spell affects whole party.All Special Spell, see Bless. Time multiplier is one day. Slo Potionis All Healing spell, slows the rate of hit point loss of e(l)e poisoned character. Potency affected by caster's level. Freosan Fight Attack spell, freezes monsters to one location, so they Affects one person. cannot move to attack. Area Spell. Spice All Conjures up objects. Item is selected randomly from a Missilus Fight Attack spell, creates missiles which may be aimed at list, dependent upon caster's level. monsters. Range Spell. Sumos Castle Summon monster to join the party, if there is room (less than 6 party members). Type of monster depends on caster's level. Monsters will not leave dungeon (return to tavern, etc.), and will run off if left behind or if split parties are switched between. Level6 Name Where Notes Level4 Dispellere Learned in Dispel Monster. When learned, displays list of Name Where Notes Castle or monster types, of which 1 can be selected. Places a Camp. Cast spell in "Spells & Scrolls" menu which, when cast in Faer Fight Attack spell, slows monsters, making them indecisive in Fight fight, will dissolve all monsters of that type. and less prone to move or attack. Area spell. Awake All Curing Spell, awakens a person who has been asleep Defense spell, affects whole party, see Fortis. rendered unconscious. Locatus All Special Spell, allows the caster to determine the lnvidere Fight Defense spell, makes a party member invisible for a current level within the Obelisk, and how many duration of time based on caster's level. Monsters 'blocks' the party is from the entrance as who have keen senses may still be able to detect their position appropriate for use with Mapper. presence by smell, sound, etc. Veikr Fight Attack spell, reduces monster strength and ability to Terror Fight Attack spell, Range Spell version of Faer. hit. Range spell. Open Castle Special Spell, causes caster to make one attempt to Cista Castle Special spell, conjures a magic chest. This chest has Portal open door at a bonus skill level (like a high level Thief four pockets which accumulate no encumbrance (i.e. or Ninja). Failure does not indicate that succeeding putting items in the chest does not add to its weight). attempts will fail, but does generate noise, which There is only one of these chests, so casting the spell a might attract monsters. second time will remove the chest from wherever it was, and cause it to appear at the feet of the spell caster, with all contents still intact. XXXVIII XXXIX Name Where Gifan Shift All Anti-Magic Fight Dopplegang Fight Schatem Fight - Hold-Portal Castle Name Where No Potionis All Striken Fight Morale Fight Scrincan Fight Level 7 Notes Cure spell, cures blindness. Attack spell, reduces monsters' resistance to magical attacks. Area Spell. Attack spell, creates duplicate ofone party member for a duration of time based upon the caster's level. Only one doppleganger may exist at one time. Any damage or injury done to one is simultaneously inflicted on the twin. Doppleganger disappears when fight ends. Attack spell, reduces a monster's ability to defend against attack, see Percer. Range Spell. -Conjures a locked door in a doorway or archway. Levels Notes Cure spell, cures poison. Attack spell, lightning strike on monster. Range Spell. Defense spell, boosts morale of party. As a result, characters will do more damage while fighting. Duration based on caster's level. Defence spell, reduces range the monster's can strike within. Area Spell. XL Name Where Percer Magic Fight FyrStriken Fight Blast Portal Castle Bricg Pytt Castle Name Where Cleric Touch All Invidere All Fight Wish All Level 9. Notes Attack spell, range version of Anti-Magic. Attack spell, fire storm. Heavy reduction of all monsters' hit points. Special Spell, attempts to permanently blow open a door. Very noisy and attracts wandering monsters._ Special spell, permanently fills most pits. Pit to be filled must be directly in front of party. Level 10 Notes Healing spell, very high level Haelen. Defense spell,makes entire party invisible for duration of the battle. Special spell, allows the caster to modify alinost any characteristic or attribute of any member of the party. 